Often one goes for one thing and finds another. 


The word yoga is related to the English word yoke. 
Yoga is the union of body, mind, and spirit  -  the 
union of your individuality with the divine intelligence 
that orchestrates the universe. Yoga is a state of being in 
which the elements and forces that comprise your biological organism are in harmonious interaction with the elements of the cosmos. Established in this state, you will 
experience enhanced emotional, psychological, and spiritual well-being and will increasingly notice the spontaneous fulfillment of your desires. In yoga  -  in union with 
spirit  -  your desires and the desires of nature are one. As 
you participate in the process of creativity along with the 
infinite being, your worries fall away and you feel a sense 


of lightheadedness and joy. There is a spontaneous blossoming of intuition, insight, imagination, creativity, 
meaning, and purpose. You make correct choices that 
benefit not only you but also everyone affected by your 
choices. When in the book of Matthew Jesus says, "My 
yoke is easy, and my burden is light," he is expressing the 
core principle of yoga. His intelligence is aligned with 
cosmic intelligence, his will with divine will. 

Traditionally, there are four forms of yoga: Gyan, Bhakti, 
Karma, and Raja. Gyan yoga is the yoga of understanding. 
The yoga of understanding is also the yoga of science. 
(Science is after all, the knowledge of nature's laws.) 
The laws of nature are God's thoughts. Science is God 
explaining God to God through a human nervous system. 
Science is not an enemy of spiritual awakening but rather 
a potentially helpful friend. Today's science reveals to us 
the mysterious nonlocal domain where everything is 
instantly correlated with everything else  -  where time, 
space, matter, energy, and information resolve into a field 
of pure potentiality. This is the realm where the immeasurable potential of all that was, all that is, and all that will 
be manifests and differentiates into the seer and the 
scenery, the observer and the observed, the knower and 
the known. 

The yoga of understanding has been referred to in the 
Upanishads as the "razor's edge," and we are cautioned to 
tread carefully on this path. As we gain understanding of 
the laws of nature, we run the risk of arrogance. Arrogance 
inflates the ego, and the ego overshadows the spirit. The 
original sincere quest for discovery leads to an alienation 
from the very source with which intimacy was sought. 




Truly great scientists are known for their humility, for 
even as they explore and unravel the secrets of the 
unknown, the unknown looms larger and becomes ever 
more mysterious. Humility leads to wonder, which leads to 
innocence. The return of innocence invites us to enter the 
luminous mystery of life and surrender to it. 

The yoga of knowledge can be a wonderful path if we 
are mature enough to understand that there are seductive 
temptations that may entrap us for a while in diversions of 
the intellect. 

The second yoga is Bhakti  -  the yoga of love and 
devotion. Bhakti is love of God but also the expression 
and blossoming of love in all your relationships. The 
divine light of God resides in all that is alive, or for that 
matter, even that which we consider inanimate. Through 
our relationships with others, we discover our higher self. 
As we embark on this journey, we may go through stages 
of attraction, infatuation, communion, intimacy, surrender, passion and ecstasy until ultimately we once again 
arrive at the source of love and the source of life. 

The yoga of love is a wonderful path, but we must not 
confuse love with self-absorption, self-importance, or 
self-pity. If you pay attention to love, think about love, 
express love, respond to gestures of love, and make love 
the basis for all your choices, then you are practicing 
Bhakti yoga, the yoga of love. 

The third yoga is referred to as Karma yoga. The ultimate expression of Karma yoga is the recognition that all 
action belongs to the Supreme Being. When you have an 
inner attitude that all your actions come from God and 
belong to God, you are a Karma yogi. The inner dialogue 
of a Karma yogi is, "I am an instrument of the eternal 



infinite being. Every breath of mine, every act of mine is 
a divine movement of the infinite. My thoughts and 
actions come from the infinite and return to the infinite." True practice of Karma yoga leads to spontaneous 
detachment from outcome and one-pointed focused 
mindfulness as you perform your actions. Action from 
this level of consciousness is not binding; rather, it liberates you and enables you spontaneously to recognize that 
you are an eternal being on a cosmic journey. Karma 
yogis have no anxiety because they have no worry. The 
Karma yogi knows that God is performing the action and 
takes care of the results. 

The fourth yoga is known as Raja yoga, the main subject of this book. Raja yoga is frequently referred to as the 
royal path to yoga because it is rich and abundant in 
knowledge and experience. Raja yoga can be practiced by 
anyone with a little bit of training. 

Raja yoga is the path of union through practices that 
take your awareness inward. The essence of Raja yoga is an 
integration of body, mind, and soul through procedures 
that enhance mind-body coordination. These techniques 
awaken poise, grace, strength, and the development of 
centered awareness even in the midst of chaos and turmoil. They improve your physical health and your mental 
clarity while heightening your senses of perception. As 
a consequence of these practices, you are able to experience increased vitality along with better mental and 
physical capacity. Raja yogis have greater enjoyment of 
life, while enthusiasm and inspiration become an everyday 
experience. 

Raja yoga helps you practice the other yogas with 
greater ease, effortlessness, and joy. When you feel 




physically vital, emotionally stable, and psychologically 
centered, your ability and desire to love and express 
authentic compassion expand. You become more capable 
of surrendering to the will of God and begin a neverending journey of knowledge. 

For those who feel that God is difficult to find, we 
want to encourage you to begin practicing the principles 
in this book. You will discover that God is not difficult to 
find. God is impossible to avoid, for there is nowhere 
that God is not. 




This book is woven with the love of many beloved souls 
who share our journey. 

We wish to thank our precious families, who lovingly 
support us in all the work we do: Rita, Mallika, Sumant 
and Tara, Gotham and Candice; Pam, Max, Sara, and 
Isabel. 

To Ray Chambers, Jose Busquets, Charley Paz, and 
Howard Simon for their unwavering support of the 
Chopra Center mission. 

To the John Wiley & Sons editorial team, Tom Miller 
and Kellam Ayres, for helping this book reach its full 
potential. 

To the dedicated staff of the Chopra Center, who 
nurture every guest entering our place of healing and 
transformation: Bill Abasolo, Vicki Abrams, Leanne 
Backer, Catherine Baer, Paula Bass, Brent Becvar, Sanjeev 
Bhanot, Marina Bigo, Sandra Blazinski, Corrine 
Champigny, Janice Crawford, Nancy Ede, Kana EmidyMazza, Jenny Ephrom, Ana Fakhri, Ana Paula Fernandez, 
Patrick Fischer, Roger Gabriel, Lorri Gifford, David 




The source from which the world and the mind rise 
and into which they set is termed Reality, which 
does not rise nor does it subside . 




I am not in the world; the world is in me." This daring 
declaration of ancient yogis gave expression to the 
perennial truth that the material universe, our physical 
bodies, and the thoughts that occupy our minds are 
expressions of an underlying unbounded field of consciousness. The "I" in the bold statement reflects a transformation in the internal reference of the seeker from 
skin-encapsulated ego to expanded spirit. These original 
explorers of consciousness charted a course for us to follow 
 -  the path of yoga. This is the path we follow. 
We are deeply gratified by the expanding acceptance in the 
West of the philosophy and practices usually attributed to 

the East. Through our books, lectures, and workshops, we 
have been sharing our understanding and experience of 
the Vedic and Yogic wisdom traditions because we 
believe that this knowledge has universal value. Just as no 
one would argue that gravity applies only to England 
because Sir Isaac Newton was British or that Einstein's 
theory of relativity was relevant only in Germany, we 
suggest that the profound insights gained through yoga are 
valuable for every person living on this planet, regardless 
of age, gender, or cultural inheritance. The principles of 
yoga are not limited by time or space. 

As the human inhabitants of our world increasingly 
recognize themselves as members of a global village, ideas 
that were rejected by all but a few wild inner-space 
explorers thirty years ago are now resonating in our collective awareness. Just a few heartbeats back, the mention 
of yoga and meditation as essential components of a 
healthy lifestyle led to skepticism and even ridicule. But 
concepts that add genuine value to life eventually find 
their way into the light of human consciousness. Paraphrasing the great German philosopher, Arthur Schopenhauer, every great idea goes through three phases before it 
is accepted. In the first it is rejected, in the second it is 
ridiculed, and in the third it is held to be self-evident. The 
value that yoga brings to body, mind, and spirit is becoming increasingly obvious to a critical mass of people in 
North America and around the world. 

Our relationship with yoga spans more than three 
decades. We learned early in our spiritual journey the 
value of alternating asanas (yoga poses), pranayama 
(breathing exercises), and meditation to stabilize aware
ness while spending extended time in silence. In Seduction of Spirit, our intensive meditation course held twice 
yearly at the Chopra Center, we repeatedly see the benefits that conscious movement brings to our guests, when 
their attention is directed inward for hours each day. As a 
result of our personal experience and that of thousands of 
course participants, this book emerged. 

The information and practices presented in this book 
provide you with a path to expand your awareness of the 
relationship between your individuality and your world. 
Our planet is in need of healing and transformation. 
With exploding population growth, the human footprint 
on earth looms larger each day. People who understand 
the relationship between individual and collective 
choices cannot ignore the issues of social justice, economic disparities, ecological disruption, and cultural 
conflicts. At times, the challenges of our age can seem 
overwhelming and beyond the influence of individual 
intention. We believe, however, that each of us has an 
opportunity to contribute to a better world through the 
very personal choices we make on daily basis. Through the 
Seven Spiritual Laws of Yoga program, you will enhance 
the integration between your body and mind and develop 
the practice of maintaining balance and flexibility in the 
midst of challenge. You will gain increased access to your 
creativity and intuition and become aware of how your 
individual thoughts, words, and actions influence and are 
influenced by your environment. As a result of this 
awareness, you will contribute to the collective awakening 
of world consciousness. 

All of our work through the Chopra Center has been 
based upon the core principle that consciousness is the 

primary force in the universe. Consciousness gives rise to 
thought; thought gives rise to action. All change begins 
with awareness  -  awareness of the current situation, 
awareness of the potential for something greater, and 
awareness of the unlimited creativity that exists within 
each of us to catalyze the transformation we want to see 
for ourselves and for generations to follow. 

Not long ago it seemed fanciful that public smoking 
would be restricted and tobacco companies would sponsor 
public service ads that discourage smoking, but this shift 
in awareness occurred when a critical mass of people 
decided they would no longer tolerate a behavior that 
harmed many while benefiting a few. In a similar way, we 
anticipate that as more people shift their inner attitude 
from What's in it for me? to How can I help? we will see an 
expanding sense of both individual and collective 
responsibility for the choices that are guiding the future of 
our planet. We are hopeful that as a result of the changes 
you experience through the practice of the Seven Spiritual Laws of Yoga program, you will be unable to resist the 
urge to contribute to the healing and transformation of 
humanity and the world. 

The initial response to the Seven Spiritual Laws of Yoga 
program has been so enthusiastic that we have developed 
a yoga training program for those interested in bringing 
this knowledge and practice to their communities. From 
novices to experienced yoga teachers, people around the 
world are learning to teach others the principles and 
technology that enable them to apply the deep wisdom of 
yoga to daily life. If, after experiencing for yourself the 
transformational power of this program, you have the 

desire to share this knowledge with others, we welcome 
your participation. Together, we can remind the members 
of our global family that each of us has the ability to contribute to peace and harmony in the world by awakening 
these qualities within. 

With love, 
Deepak and David 



The Philosophy 
of Yoga 




Yoga Is Union 

Y 



Without self-knowledge , we cannot go beyond the 
mind. 

 -  Jiddu Krishnamurti 



The proliferation of yoga classes and yoga centers 
throughout the Western world is a tribute to yoga's 
indisputable power to enliven physical well-being. In 
cities across North America, Europe, and Australia, yoga 
studios offer students a vast range of styles and techniques designed to enhance fitness. Yoga postures can 
increase your flexibility, strengthen your muscles, improve 
your posture, and enhance your circulation. Athletic 
programs from gymnastics to football now incorporate 
yoga for its systematic approach to stretching muscles, 
tendons, and joints. Fitness enthusiasts are often pleasantly surprised by how quickly the addition of yoga 


postures to a workout routine can improve tone and 
posture. 

If the practice of yoga provided only these physical 
benefits, it would fully justify its place in our lives. However, at its core, yoga is much more than a system of physical fitness. It is a science of balanced living, a path for 
realizing full human potential. In these tumultuous 
times, yoga provides an anchor to a quieter domain of 
life, enabling people living in a modern technological 
world to stay connected to their natural humanity. Yoga 
offers the promise of remaining centered in the midst of 
turbulence. 

The essential purpose of yoga is the integration of all 
the layers of life  -  environmental, physical, emotional, 
psychological, and spiritual. The word yoga is derived 
from the Sanskrit root yuj, which means "to unite." It is 
related to the English word yoke. A farmer yoking two 
oxen to pull his plow is performing an action that hints at 
the essence of a spiritual experience. At its core, yoga 
means union, the union of body, mind, and soul; the 
union of the ego and the spirit; the union of the mundane 
and the divine. 

The Seven Spiritual Laws in Action 

The Seven Spiritual Laws of Yoga program will raise your 
level of physical vitality, clear emotional blockages from 
your heart, and awaken your joyfulness and enthusiasm 
for life. Since its release in 1994, Deepak's book The Seven 
Spiritual Laws of Success has improved the lives of millions 
of readers around the world. Through seven easily understood principles, The Seven Spiritual Laws of Success pro

claims that harmony, happiness, and abundance are 
available to anyone willing to embrace a consciousnessbased approach to life. Our yoga program brings the 
seven laws into action through the principles and techniques of a consciousness-based practice. 

We celebrate the rising popularity of yoga in the 
Western world. Even if your primary motivation for taking 
a yoga class is to lose weight or to develop a more muscular body, you cannot escape the subtler benefits of 
enhanced vitality and a noticeable reduction in your 
stress level. Yoga is a practical system to awaken human 
potential. It does not require you to believe in a set of 
principles in order to reap its benefits. On the contrary, 
the regular practice of yoga naturally generates a healthy 
belief system based upon your direct experience of the 
world through a more flexible nervous system. Perform 
yoga poses on a regular basis and your mind and emotions 
will change. 

Yoga is a central component of the comprehensive 
system of Indian philosophy known as Vedic science. 
With roots in the Indus Valley civilization going back 
over five thousand years, the Vedas represent the poetic 
cognitions of enlightened sages on the origins of the universe and the evolution of life. The English word wisdom 
traces its origins to the primitive Germanic word void, 
meaning "to know." Wid, in turn, is derived from the 
Sanskrit word Veda, meaning "external knowledge." The 
Vedas are the expression of perennial wisdom, and yoga is 
the practical aspect of Vedic science. Yoga is a system 
through which human beings can directly access the wisdom of life. Practitioners of yoga  -  yogis  -  are dynamic 
and creative forces for positive change. A yogi knows 

that his mind and body are in the ever-changing world, 
but his essence  -  his soul  -  resides in a dimension that is 
beyond change. 

The Seven Spiritual Laws of Yoga program is designed 
for those who wish to take their yoga practice to a deeper 
level, using their bodies to access more expanded levels of 
their minds. This is the time-honored value of yoga  -  to 
cultivate an inner state of centered awareness that cannot 
be disturbed by the inevitable turmoil of life. 

Layers of Life 

People are complex and multifaceted beings with many 
rich layers, although the Western scientific model of a 
person tends to reflect the Newtonian mechanistic view of 
life that sees people as primarily physical entities  -  biological machines that have learned to think. Despite the 
fact that almost a century ago the discoveries of quantum 
physics revealed that the material model of life is incomplete, modern medicine and physiology continue to view 
people as primarily composed of molecules. 

According to this predominantly physical perspective, if you are feeling depressed, it is not because you are 
harboring anger and resentment over the affair your 
spouse had with your best friend; rather, it is the result of 
inadequate levels of serotonin in your brain. If you simply 
enhance the level of this neurotransmitter molecule 
through the appropriate selective serotonin reuptake 
inhibitor, your depression will vanish. If your blood pressure is elevated, it is not the consequence of constant 
strain with your demanding boss; rather, it is the result of 
excessive levels of the chemical angiotensin. Take an 

angiotensin converting enzyme inhibitor and your blood 
pressure will normalize. If you have trouble sleeping at 
night, your excessive credit card debt is not to blame; 
your brain is simply not producing sufficient concentrations of gamma-aminobutyric acid. Any of a number of 
medications will correct this deficiency and you will 
sleep as soundly as a baby. 

This material approach can be remarkably effective in 
the short-term relief of symptoms. Unfortunately, it 
rarely promotes a deeper understanding of life, it rarely 
leads to healing and transformation, and the side effects of 
medications are often limiting. 

Expanding the vision of life beyond a purely biochemical perspective, yoga reminds us that we live life 
simultaneously on many levels. The essence of yoga is to 
find the unity in the diversity of our multidimensionality. 
Throughout the centuries, great yoga teachers have 
awakened their contemporaries to the fascinating paradox 
that although to the mind and senses the world is an 
ever-changing experience, from the perspective of spirit, 
the infinite diversity of forms and phenomena is simply 
the disguise of an underlying nonchanging reality. 

Adi Shankara, the Sage of Sages 

One of the most influential teachers of the philosophy of 
yoga and Veda was the ninth-century sage Adi Shankara. 
Known as the greatest revivalist of Vedic science, he elegantly elaborated the layers of life that mask the essential 
spiritual self. Born in A.D. 805, Shankara is said to have 
been fluent in Sanskrit by the age of one and to have mastered all sacred literature by age eight. He began writing 

his own commentaries on the Vedas by age fifteen and was 
recognized as the leading authority on yoga by the time he 
turned twenty. He established seats of learning throughout 
India with one goal in mind  -  to help human beings 
overcome their suffering through the wisdom of life. His 
approach to truth was called Advaita, meaning "nondualism." The essence of Shankara's teaching is that one 
underlying field of intelligence manifests as the multiplicity of forms and phenomena that we call the physical 
universe. 

It is helpful to recognize the disguises consciousness 
dons so you can see through to the underlying reality. 
This is the great game of hide-and-seek that spirit plays 
with us. The nonlocal field of awareness gives rise to 
the sensory world that overshadows our experience of the 
underlying unity. At some point we recognize that the 
world of sensations alone cannot bring us genuine peace or 
happiness, so we begin our journey of uncovering the layers that mask our essential unbounded nature. Shankara 
called these various layers koshas, meaning "coverings," 
and he categorized them into three primary divisions  -  a 
physical body, a subtle body, and a causal body. We can 
also say body, mind, and soul. Let's explore each of these 
primary divisions and their three secondary layers. 



The Physical Body  -  
The Field of Molecules 

Within your physical domain, you have an extended 
body, a personal body, and an energetic body. Your 
extended body is the environment, containing the never






ending supply of energy and information that is available 
to you. Every sound, sensation, sight, flavor, and aroma 
you ingest from the environment influences your body 
and mind. Although your senses may tell you otherwise, 
there is no distinct boundary between your personal and 
extended bodies, which are in constant and dynamic 
exchange. Each breath that you inhale and exhale is a 
reminder of the continuous conversation taking place 
between your physical body and your environment. 

This recognition requires you to take responsibility 
for what is happening in your environment. As a yogi, you 
are an environmentalist because you recognize that the 
rivers flowing through the valleys and those flowing 
through your veins are intimately related. The breath of 




an old-growth forest and your most recent breath are 
inextricably intertwined. The quality of the soil in which 
your food is raised is directly connected to the health of 
your tissues and organs. Your environment is your 
extended body. You are inseparably interwoven with your 
ecosystem. 

Of course, you do have a personal body that consists of 
the molecules that temporarily comprise your cells, tissues, 
and organs. We say temporarily because although it 
appears that your body is solid and constant, it actually is 
continuously transforming. Scientific studies using radioisotope tracings convincingly show that 98 percent of 
the ten trillion quadrillion (10 28 ) atoms in your body are 
replaced annually. Your stomach lining re-creates itself 
about every five days, your skin is made anew every 
month, and your liver cells turn over every six weeks. 
Although your body appears to be fixed and stable, it is 
continually metamorphosing. 

The vast majority of the cells in your body are derived 
from the food you eat. Recognizing this, Shankara named 
the physical body annamaya kosha, meaning "the covering 
made of food." To create and maintain a healthy body, 
yogis pay attention to the food they consume, minimizing 
the toxicity they ingest while maximizing the nourishment they receive. Certain foods are said to be particularly 
conducive to a yogic lifestyle. These foods are known as 
sattvic, which means they contribute to the purity of the 
body. The four most sattvic foods revered by yogis are 
almonds, honey, milk, and ghee (clarified butter). Getting a daily dose of these foods benefits the body, mind, 
and soul of a person dedicated to creating greater mindbody integration. When acknowledging the relationship 

between your personal and extended bodies be certain to 
consume only organic dairy products. 

Shankara called the third layer of the physical body 
pranamaya kosha, meaning "the sheath made of vital 
energy." There is a difference between the cells of a 
corpse and the cells of a vibrant living being. This organizing principle that breathes life into biochemicals is 
called prana. There are five seats of prana in the body, 
localized in the head, throat, heart, stomach, and pelvis. 
These centers of movement govern the flow of life force 
throughout the body. When prana is moving freely 
throughout the cells and tissues, vitality and creativity 
are abundant. Yogic breathing exercises, known as 
pranayama techniques, are designed to awaken and purify 
the vital energy layer of the body. We'll be exploring 
these powerful approaches in chapter 4. 



The Subtle Body  -  The Mind Field 

Most people identify themselves with their mind, intellect, and ego, which are the components of the subtle 
body. The seventeenth-century French philosopher 
Rene Descartes is famous for his statement, "Cogito , ergo 
sum," meaning "I think, therefore I am." People continue 
to believe that they are their minds, but Shankara 
encourages us to recognize that the components of our 
subtle body are simply coverings of the soul. 

According to this framework, the mind is the repository 
of sensory impressions. When you hear a sound, feel a sensation, see a sight, taste a flavor, or smell a fragrance, the 
sensory experience registers in your consciousness at a 

level of your being called manomaya kosha. The mind 
cycles through different states of consciousness, and your 
sensory experiences change with these changing states. 
The impressions that enter your awareness during a waking state are different from those generated during 
dreaming. Yoga reminds us that reality is different in different states of consciousness  -  different filters of the 
mind layer. 

The second layer of the subtle body is the intellect, 
known as buddhimaya kosha. This is the aspect of mind 
that discriminates. Whether you are trying to decide 
what kind of toothpaste to purchase, which partner to 
choose, or what house to buy, your intellect is at work, 
attempting to calculate the advantages and disadvantages of every choice you make. This layer integrates 
information based upon your beliefs and feelings to come 
to a decision. According to yoga, the ultimate purpose of 
this intellectual layer is to distinguish the real from the 
unreal. The real is that which cannot be lost whereas the 
unreal is anything that has a beginning and end to it. 
Knowing the difference is the essence of yoga. 

The third layer of the subtle body is the ego. The ego 
is known in yoga as ahankara, which means the "I -former." 
According to Shankara, the ego is that aspect of your 
being that identifies with the positions and possessions of 
your life. It is ultimately your self-image  -  the way you 
want to project who you are to yourself and to the world. 

The ego is the boundary maker that attempts to assert 
ownership through the concepts of "I," "me," "my," and 
"mine." The ego seeks security through control and often 
has a deep-seated need for approval. Most emotional 
pain is the result of your ego being offended because 

something that it believed it had control over was actually 
outside your jurisdiction. 

It is easy to become lost in the subtle body, with its 
attachments to roles, relationships, and objects, but 
Shankara encourages us to go deeper. Letting go of the 
body and letting go of the mind open the possibility of 
experiencing an aspect of your being that is beyond your 
usual limitations. This is the realm of spirit, which 
Shankara called the causal body. 



The Causal Body  -  The Field 
of Pure Potentiality 

According to yoga, underlying the field of molecules we 
call the physical body and the field of thoughts called the 
subtle body is a realm of life known as the causal body or 
the domain of spirit. Although we cannot perceive or 
measure this sphere of life, it gives rise to our thoughts, 
feelings, dreams, desires, and memories, as well as to the 
molecules that make up our bodies and the material 
world. Like the physical body and the subtle body, the 
causal body has three layers. 

The personal domain of spirit is the layer where the 
seeds of memories and desires are sown. According to 
Shankara, each person arrives on this planet with a specific purpose and a unique set of talents. Given the right 
environment, the seeds sprout, and you become capable of 
expressing your gifts in the world. Although the modern 
material model of life suggests that their genes determine 
people's talents, we only have to look at identical twins 
to realize that the same molecular structure does not 

determine an individual's nature. Pregnant mothers 
report that even in the womb, different babies express 
different tendencies. 

According to Shankara, every individual has a personal soul with its unique memories and desires. These 
memories and desires guide the course of your life. When 
you nurture the seeds of your innate gifts with your attention and intention, they sprout, and your personal soul 
finds fulfillment. 

The second sheath of the causal body is the collective 
domain. This realm impels you to live a life of mythic proportions. The gods and goddesses that reside in the collective domain within your soul have one desire  -  to 
express their creative power through you. Each of us is on 
a heroic journey in search of the Holy Grail. Along the 
way, obstacles and challenges arise, forcing us to reach 
deeper into our being. 

These collective aspirations are translated into the 
archetypal stories that people have been telling one 
another for millennia. For example, we learn the risks 
associated with the arrogance of power through the tragic 
story of Icarus. Ignoring the advice of his father, he 
flew too close to the sun, melted his waxen wings, and 
crashed into the ocean. If Bill Clinton or Martha Stewart 
had heeded the wisdom resonating in their collective 
domain, they might have avoided their foretold painful 
outcomes. 

A woman who closes down when a relationship 
becomes too intimate is living the myth of Daphne who, 
overwhelmed by the pursuit of Apollo, is transformed 
into a laurel tree. A young man seeking to reestablish a 
formerly successful family business is reenacting the story 

of Jason and the Argonauts. The stories unfolding in our 
lives and those around us are perennial stories. 

The mythic gods and goddesses are alive and well 
within our collective domain. We can see the expression 
of Queen Juno in the powerful women of our era  -  Margaret Thatcher, Golda Meir, Hillary Clinton. The goddess 
of nature, Diana, shows her modern face through Jane 
Goodall and Julia "Butterfly" Hill. Venus made her most 
direct appearance via Marilyn Monroe, while Dionysus, 
the god of intoxication and excess, has a tendency to 
show up in the stream of people who require stays at the 
Betty Ford Clinic. 

You are a living story. Become aware of the stories 
you tell about yourself and your world. Participate consciously in the writing of the next chapter of your life. 
Yoga encourages you to expand your sense of self to 
embrace the collective domain of your soul. This is 
where the deepest aspirations of humanity find fulfillment through the perennial stories we tell ourselves and 
our children. 

According to Shankara, the deepest aspect of your 
being is beyond time, space, and causality, yet gives rise to 
the manifest universe. This is the universal domain of 
spirit in which all distinctions merge in unity. Having no 
qualities of its own, this field of pure potentiality manifests 
as the infinitely diverse world of forms and phenomena. 
The unbounded ocean of being disguises itself in the 
sheaths of the causal, subtle, and physical realms. 

This nonlocal, unbounded realm is the source and 
goal of life. Yoga encourages us to bring our attention to 
this universal domain so that we become imbued with 
the deep stillness and creativity it represents. Then, even 

as we are engaged in dynamic activity, we retain the 
silence and centered awareness of universal spirit. 



The vision of life as elaborated by Shankara is as useful 
today as it was centuries ago. For seekers of greater wellbeing, vitality, and wisdom, Shankara offers a map that 
ultimately leads to the soul. 

The Seven Spiritual Laws of Yoga program provides 
the technology to support this journey. Whether you are 
new to yoga or have been practicing for some time, we 
intend for this program to shift your awareness. Marcel 
Proust wrote, "The real journey of discovery is not in 
seeking new landscapes, but in seeing with new eyes." It is 
our intention that the Seven Spiritual Laws of Yoga program will enable you to see your environment, body, 
mind, and emotions from a new perspective. 

This subtle shift in consciousness can be a powerful 
catalytic force for healing and transformation in your 
life. Try this program for a month, and you will see 
changes, not only in your practice of poses but also in your 
life as a whole. 




Soul Questions 

Y 



Nothing here below is profane for those who know 
how to see. On the contrary, everything is sacred. 

 -  Pierre Teilhard de Chardin 



The generally recognized founder of yoga philosophy is 
the legendary sage Maharishi Patanjali, whose life is 
shrouded in the mists of myth and history. According to 
one story, his mother, Gonnika, was praying for a child to 
Lord Vishnu, the god who maintains the universe. 
Vishnu was so moved by her purity and devotion that he 
asked his beloved cosmic serpent, Ananta, to prepare for 
human incarnation. A tiny speck of Ananta's celestial 
body fell into Gonnika's upturned palms. She nurtured 
this cosmic seed with her love until it developed into a 
baby boy. She named her child Patanjali from the word 
pat, meaning "descended from heaven," and anjali, the 
word for her praying posture. This being, whose life 




historians date back two centuries before the birth of 
Christ, elaborated the principles of yoga for the benefit of 
humanity. 

In his classic work, the Yoga Sutras, Patanjali sets the 
goal of yoga as nothing short of total freedom from suffering. To fulfill this worthy intention, Patanjali elaborated 
the eight branches of yoga. Each of these components of 
yoga helps you shift your internal reference point from 
constricted to expanded consciousness. As you move 
from local to nonlocal awareness, your internal reference 
point spontaneously transforms from ego to spirit, which 
enables you to see the bigger picture when facing any 
challenge. 

According to Patanjali, whenever we are solely identified with our ego, we bind ourselves to things that do not 
have permanent reality. This may be attachment to a 
relationship, a job, a body, or a material possession. It 
may be attachment to a belief or an idea of the way 
things should be. Whatever the object of attachment is, 
the binding of your identity to something that resides in 
the world of forms and phenomena is the seed cause of distress, unhappiness, and illness. Remembering that the 
real you is not trapped in the volume of a body for the 
span of a lifetime is the key to genuine freedom and joy. 
Yoga is designed to give you a glimpse of your essential self 
by taking you from deep silence into dynamic action and 
back again to profound stillness. In the practice of the 
Seven Spiritual Laws of Yoga program, you will experience 
this full range of yoga  -  stillness to activity and back to 
stillness. 

Yoga philosophy begins with the spirit. Getting in touch 
with your spirit is the true goal of yoga. It occurs naturally 
when your mind quiets and you are able to access the 
inner wisdom that emerges from the deepest aspect of 
your being. One way to connect with your soul is by consciously asking yourself questions that go to the heart of 
the human experience. There are three key questions 
that help shift your internal reference point from ego to 
spirit. They are: 

Who am I? 
What do I want? 
How can I serve? 

Whether or not you are aware of it, these questions are 
directing your choices in life. Regularly bringing your 
current answers to conscious awareness enables you to be 
alert to the opportunities that resonate with the needs of 
your soul. 

When asked the question, Who are you? most people 
usually identify themselves in terms of their positions 
and possessions. You might say, "I am the chief financial 
officer of a software company," or "I am a high school 
math teacher." You may identify with where you live, 
saying, "I am a New Yorker," or "I'm Canadian." You may 
identify yourself in terms of a relationship by responding, 
"I am the assistant to the president," or "I am a mother." 
Although we all have the tendency to identify ourselves 
with roles, objects, and relationships in our lives, yoga 
encourages us to go deeper into our being and find 
the inner place that is beyond external anchors. This is 
the source of all energy and creativity in life. When 
you begin to recognize that your essential nature is 

unbounded and eternal, life becomes joyful, meaningful, 
and carefree. 

Try this simple exercise to become aware of your current internal reference point. Simply close your eyes, 
take a few slow, deep breaths, and settle your awareness in 
the area of your heart. Now silently ask yourself the question, Who am I? every fifteen seconds. Listen innocently 
to the answers that emerge from your deeper mind. 

As you perform this process, you may recognize that 
you define yourself by the roles you play, answering the 
question, Who am I? with: 

I am . . . 

a computer programmer 

the vice president of marketing 

a pediatric nurse 

You may define yourself by a group with which you 
identify. 

I am . . . 

an American 

a New York Yankees fan 

a Libertarian 

You may define yourself in terms of a relationship. 

I am . . . 

a single parent 

a loving spouse 

a devoted daughter 

You may see yourself in terms of certain practices you 
perform. 

I am . . . 

a vegetarian 

a triathlete 

a meditator 

From the perspective of yoga, each of these identity 
points represents some aspect of you but not the ultimate 
essence of who you are. Asking the second question of the 
soul, What do I want? takes you deeper. In the Upanishads, one of the crown jewels in the Vedic body of literature, there is the expression, "You are what your deep, 
driving desire is. As is your desire, so is your will. As is 
your will, so is your deed. As is your deed, so is your destiny." When you know what a person desires, you know 
the essence of that person. To become more aware of 
your deep desires, close your eyes and ask yourself every fifteen seconds the questions: 

What do I want? 
What do I really want? 

Different levels of your being give rise to different 
desires. Your physical body has intrinsic needs for food, 
water, oxygen, and sexual gratification. Listening to the 
desires of your body and providing nourishing fulfillment 
ensure health and vitality. Your subtle body has needs for 
emotional connection, achievement, and recognition. 
Expressing your talents and honoring the contributions 
made by others ensure the health and well-being of 
your subtle body. Your causal body has the need for 
creative expression and renewal. It has the need for unity 
to predominate over diversity, for expansiveness over 
restriction. 

The spiritual journey is one of fulfilling the needs of 
the flesh, the needs of the mind, and the needs of the 
spirit. When you are willing to pose the question to yourself, What do I really want? you are asking what level of 
your being is expressing a need. Listen to the answers 
that arise from within you and write them down. Watch 
how over time your desires become fulfilled or are transformed in different expressions. Whether they are satisfied 
or change, new desires will arise to fill the void. Become 
conscious of the forces that drive your choices and you 
will become more intimate with your essential nature. 
This will deepen your connection to your soul, which is 
the goal of yoga. 

As you become increasingly conscious of your identity 
and your desires, ask yourself the third soul question, 
How can I serve? Again, close your eyes, bring your 
attention into the area of your heart, and ask yourself 
these questions, listening to the responses that emerge 
from a deeper aspect of your being: 

How can I serve? 

How can I be of service? 

How can I help? 

How can I best serve? 

The inner dialogue of the subtle body revolves around 
the questions, What do I get out of this? What's in it for 
me? As your inner reference point expands to embrace 
your causal body, your inner dialogue shifts to, How can I 
help? As your sense of self expands, your compassion proportionately increases and you naturally find yourself caring about how your choices influence those around you. 

Yogic sages would agree that the first-century Rabbi 
Hillel's questions are worth asking: 

If I am not for myself, who will be for me? 

If 1 am only for myself, what am I? 

If not now, when? 

The true purpose of yoga is to discover that aspect of 
your being that can never be lost. Your job may change, 
your relationships may change, your body may change, your 
beliefs may change, your desires may change, your ideas 
about your role in the world may change, but the essence 
of who you are is the continuity of awareness that has no 
beginning or end. Your thoughts, beliefs, expectations, 
goals, and experiences may come and go, but the one who 
is having the experiences  -  the experiencer  -  remains. 

As you progress in your practice, you may find that the 
answers to the questions, Who am I? What do I want? and 
How can I serve? emerge from a deeper layer of your 
being. You may find your sense of identity changing, 
reflecting a more expanded view of your self. You may 
find your desires becoming less personal. As your concept 
of self expands, your concern about others may simultaneously increase. You may discover a deepening aspiration 
to make a contribution to your community and your 
world. This expansion of self-awareness is the essence 
of yoga. 




The Royal Path 
to Union 

Y 



In the attitude of silence the soul finds the path in a 
clearer light, and what is elusive and deceptive 
resolves itself into crystal clearness. 

 -  Mahatma Gandhi 



Your body is a field of molecules. Your mind is a field of 
thoughts. Underlying and giving rise to your body 
and your mind is a field of consciousness  -  the domain of 
spirit. To know yourself as an unbounded spirit disguised as 
a body/mind frees you to live with confidence and compassion, with love and enthusiasm. To remove the veils 
that hide the deepest layers of your being, Maharishi 
Patanjali elaborated the eight branches of yoga  -  Yavna, 
Niyama, Asana, Pranayama, Pratyahara, Dharana, Dhyana, 
and Samadhi. They are sometimes referred to as the eight 

limbs (asthanga) of yoga, but they are not to be seen as 
sequential stages. Rather, they serve as different entry 
points into an expanded sense of self through interpretations, choices, and experiences that remind you of your 
essential nature. These are the components of Raja yoga, 
the royal path to union. Let's review each of them in 
some detail. 

The First Branch of Yoga  -  Yama 

Yama is most commonly translated as the "rules of social 
behavior." They are the universal guidelines for engaging 
with others. The Yamas are traditionally described as 2. speaking truthfully 4. being honest All spiritual and religious traditions encourage people 
to live ethical lives. Yoga agrees but concedes that living 
a life in perfect harmony with your environment is 
difficult from the level of morality  -  through a prescribed 
set of shoulds and should-nots. Patanjali describes the 
yamas as the spontaneously evolutionary behavior of an 
enlightened being. 

If you recognize that your individuality is intimately 
woven into the fabric of life  -  that you are a strand in the 
web of life  -  you lose the ability to act in ways that are 
harmful to yourself or others. You adhere to the rules 
of social conduct because you are behaving from the level 

of spontaneous right action. This state of behaving 
in accordance with natural law is called Kriya Shakti. 
Although the Sanskrit words kriya and karma both mean 
"action," kriya is action that does not generate reaction, as 
opposed to karma, which automatically generates proportionate consequences. There are no personal consequences when you are acting from the level of Kriya 
Shakti because you do not generate any resistance. People 
sometimes describe this state as being "in the flow" or "in 
the zone." 

Acting from this level of your soul, you are incapable 
of being violent because your whole being is established in 
peace. This is the essence of the first Yama, known in 
Sanskrit as ahimsa. Your thoughts are nonviolent, your 
words are nonviolent, and your actions are nonviolent. 
Violence cannot arise because your heart and mind are 
filled with love and compassion for the human condition. Mahatma Gandhi championed the principle of 
nonviolence in the independence movement of India 
from Britain. He said, "If you express your love in such a 
manner that it impresses itself indelibly upon your socalled enemy, he must return that love . . . and that 
requires far greater courage than delivering of blows." 

The second Yama is truthfulness, or satya. Truthfulness 
derives from a state of being in which you are able to distinguish your observations from your interpretations. You 
accept the world as it is, recognizing that reality is a selective act of attention and interpretation. Recognizing that 
truth is different for different people, you commit to lifesupporting choices that are aligned with an expanded 
view of self. Patanjali described truth as the integrity of 
thought, word, and action. You speak the sweet truth and 

are inherently honest because truthfulness is an expression 
of your commitment to a spiritual life. The short-term 
benefits of distorting the truth are outweighed by the discomfort that arises from betraying your integrity. Ultimately you recognize truth, love, and God to be different 
expressions of the same undifferentiated reality. 

Brahmacharya, the third Yama, is often translated as 
"celibacy." We believe this is a limited view of this yama. 
The word is derived from achara, meaning "pathway," 
and brahman, meaning "unity consciousness." In Vedic 
society, people traditionally chose one of two paths to 
enlightenment  -  the path of the householder and the 
path of a renunciate. For those choosing the path of a 
monk or a nun, the path to unity consciousness naturally 
includes forsaking sexual activity. For the vast majority of 
people choosing the householder path, brahmacharya 
means rejoicing in the healthy expression of sexual 
energy. One interpretation of the word charya is "grazing," suggesting that brahmacharya connotes partaking 
of the sacred as you are engaged in your daily life. 

The essential creative power of the universe is sexual, 
and you are a loving manifestation of that energy. Seeing 
the entire creation as an expression of the divine impulse 
to generate, you celebrate the creative forces. Brahmacharya means aligning with the creative energy of the 
cosmos. Ultimately, as your soul makes love with the cosmos, your need to express your sexuality may be supplanted by a more expanded expression of love. 

The fourth Yama, asteya, or honesty, means relinquishing the idea that things outside yourself will provide 
you security and happiness. Asteya is being established in 
a state of nongrasping. Lack of honesty almost always 

derives from fear of loss  -  loss of money, love, position, 
power. The ability to live an honest life is based upon a 
deep connection to spirit. When inner fullness predominates, you lose the need to manipulate, obscure, or 
deceive. Honesty is the intrinsic state of a person living a 
life of integrity. According to yoga, life-supporting, evolutionary behaviors are the natural consequence of 
expanded awareness. 

The fifth Yama, generosity, or aparigraha, derives from 
the shift in internal reference from predominantly 
ego-based to predominantly spirit-based. A yogi who 
knows that his essential nature is nonlocal spontaneously 
expresses generosity in every thought, word, and action. 
Constricted awareness reinforces limitations. Expanded 
awareness generates abundance consciousness. This 
Yama implies the absence of aversion. Established in 
aparigraha, your attachment to the accumulation of 
material possessions loses its hold on you. It doesn't 
mean you don't enjoy the world; you are simply not 
imprisoned by it. The practice of yoga, which cultivates 
expanded awareness, awakens generosity because nature 
is generous. 

The Second Branch of Yoga  -  Niyama 

The second limb of yoga as outlined by Patanjali is 
Niyama, traditionally interpreted as the "rules of personal 
behavior." We see them as the qualities naturally 
expressed in an evolutionary personality. How do you 
live when no one is looking? What choices do you make 
when you are the only witness? The Niyamas of yoga 
encourage 

1. purity 3. discipline 5. surrender to the divine 

Again, these qualities do not arise by making a mood of 
moral self-righteousness, but they emerge as a result of a 
person living a natural, balanced life. H. G. Wells said, 
"Moral indignation is jealousy with a halo," and yoga 
would agree. 

Like ideal social conduct, evolutionary personal qualities derive from your connection to spirit. Focusing on 
the first Niyama, purity, or shoucha, adds no value to life if 
it encourages a judgmental mind-set, but it is of great 
value if you see your choices in terms of nourishment versus toxicity. Your body and mind are constructed from 
the impressions that you ingest from the environment. 
The sounds, sensations, sights, tastes, and smells carry 
the energy and information that are metabolized into 
you. Yoga encourages you to consciously choose experiences that are nourishing to your body, mind, and soul. 

Contentment, or santosha, the second Niyama, is the 
fragrance of present moment awareness. When you struggle against the present moment, you struggle against the 
entire cosmos. Contentment, however, does not imply 
acquiescence. Yogis are committed in thought, word, and 
deed to supporting evolutionary change that enhances 
the well-being of all sentient creatures on this planet. 
Contentment implies acceptance without resignation. 

Contentment emerges when you relinquish your 

attachment to the need for control, power, and approval. 
Santosha is the absence of addiction to power, sensation, 
and security. Through the practice of yoga, your experience 
of the present moment quiets the mental turbulence that 
disturbs your contentment  -  contentment that reflects a 
state of being in which your peace is independent of situations and circumstances happening around you. 

The third Niyama, tapas, is traditionally translated as 
"discipline" or "austerity." The word tapas means "fire." 
When the fire of a yogi's life is burning brightly, she is a 
beacon of light radiating balance and peace to the world. 
The fire is also responsible for digesting both nourishment and toxicity. A healthy inner fire can metabolize all 
impurities. 

People often associate discipline with deprivation. 
The lives of people established in a yogic lifestyle may 
appear to be disciplined because their biological rhythms 
are aligned with the rhythms of nature. They arise early, 
meditate daily, exercise regularly, eat in a healthful and 
balanced way, and go to bed early because they directly 
experience the benefits of harmonizing their personal 
rhythms with those of nature. Tapas is embracing transformation as the pathway to higher consciousness. 

Self-study, or svadhyana, is the fourth Niyama. Traditionally, this is interpreted as being dedicated to the 
study of spiritual literature, but at its heart, self-study 
means looking inside. There is a difference between 
knowledge and knowingness. Yoga advises us not to confuse information with wisdom, and self-study helps you 
understand the distinction. Self-study encourages selfreferral as opposed to object referral. Your value and 
security come from a deep connection to spirit rather 

than from the things with which you are surrounded. 
When svadhyana is lively in your awareness, joy arises 
from within rather than being dependent upon outer 
accomplishments or acquisitions. 

The final Niyama, Ishwara-Pranidhana, is often translated as "faith" or "surrendering to God." Ishwara is the 
personalized aspect of the infinite. Even when considering 
the boundless, the human mind wants to create boundaries. Ishwara is the name applied that makes familiar the 
infinite and unbounded field of intelligence. Ultimately, 
Ishwara-Pranidhana is surrendering to the wisdom of 
uncertainty. The seeds of wisdom are sown when you surrender to the unknown. The known is the past. True 
transformation, healing, and creativity flow out of present 
moment awareness, which means relinquishing your 
attachment to the past and embracing uncertainty. 

A deeply spiritual friend of ours once contacted us 
from the coronary care unit at a New York hospital to say 
he had just had an emergency three -vessel coronary 
artery bypass operation. Only forty-two years old, he had 
never smoked, he was a vegetarian, and he meditated 
regularly. We obviously were very concerned about how 
he was doing and feeling, but he quickly reassured us he 
was doing well and was confident that everything would 
work out fine. 

He explained that a few days earlier he had been visiting Long Island and had driven to Coney Island to ride 
on the roller coasters. He enjoyed riding the roller coasters because despite the turbulence, he knew he was safe. 
In an analogous way, because of his deep connection to 
spirit, our friend was able to surrender to the unknown 

when a blood vessel to his heart suddenly became 
blocked. He trusted that despite the twists and turns his 
life was taking, he would be okay whatever the outcome. 
This is Ishwara-Pranidhana  -  surrender to the divine. 

The Yamas and Niyamas represent the inner dialogue 
of a yogi. These are not qualities one can make a mood of 
or manipulate. They arise spontaneously as the natural 
expression of a more expanded sense of self. You can see 
them as milestones of your spiritual progress. Allow them 
to resonate in your awareness, avoiding the impulse to be 
self-critical or judgmental when you occasionally fail to 
express the highest value of each principle. To awaken 
spontaneous evolutionary thought and action in your 
being, Patanjali encourages you to put your attention 
on more refined aspects of your body, your breath, your 
senses, and your mind. These are the next branches 
of yoga. 

The Third Branch of Yoga  -  Asana 

The word asana means "seat" or "position." When people 
consider yoga, they usually think of this branch, which 
refers to the postures people enter into to achieve physical 
flexibility and tone. At a deeper level, asana means the 
full expression of mind-body integration, in which you 
become consciously aware of the flow of life energy in 
your body. Performing asanas with full awareness is practice for performing action in life with awareness. 

In the great Indian epic, the Bhagavad Gita, Lord 
Krishna instructs the archetypal human Arjuna first to 
become established in being, then to perform action in 

accordance with evolutionary law. The expression in 
Sanskrit is "Yogastah kurukarmani," which means 
"Established in yoga, perform action." Yoga here refers to 
the unified, integrated state of body, mind, and spirit. 

The postures of yoga offer tremendous benefit to your 
body and mind. They help create balance, flexibility, and 
strength  -  all essential qualities for a healthy, dynamic 
life. When performed vigorously in sets, yoga can also be 
a powerful aerobic exercise to improve your cardiovascular fitness. 

In addition to the direct benefits during the performance of postures, asanas provide enduring value throughout the day. If you perform asanas regularly, you will feel 
more flexible physically and emotionally. Flexibility is 
the essential difference between the vitality of youth and 
the lassitude of old age. Here is a yogic expression that we 
find inspiring: "Infinite flexibility is the secret to 
immortality." Like a palm tree that adapts to rather than 
resists gale force winds, a flexible body and mind enable 
you to adapt to the inevitable changes that life offers. 
Regular practice of yoga asanas cultivates flexibility 
while helping to release stagnating toxins from your body 
that inhibit the free flow of vital energy. 

In the Seven Spiritual Laws of Yoga program, we 
have chosen asanas that enhance the flexibility of your 
joints, improve your balance, strengthen your muscles, 
and calm your mind. If you combine flexibility, balance, 
strength, and inner peace, you can surmount any obstacle. 
We will explore in great detail the most important yoga 
positions in chapter 5. 

The Fourth Branch of Yoga  -  
Pranayama 

Prana is life force. It is the essential energy that animates 
inert matter into living, evolving biological beings. As 
first-year medical students, we took classes in gross 
anatomy in which there was the implied assumption that 
studying a cadaver could teach us about life. At the turn 
of the twentieth century, scientists would weigh someone 
immediately before and after they died to see if they 
could quantify what had left. (They did not record a 
difference, concluding that the soul did not weigh anything.) 

From the perspective of yoga, the difference between 
a living being and a cadaver is the presence of prana, or 
vital energy. 

When prana is flowing freely throughout your 
body/mind, you will feel healthy and vibrant. When 
prana is blocked, fatigue and disease soon follow. The 
concept of an animating force is present in every major 
wisdom and healing tradition. It is known as chi or qi in 
Traditional Chinese Medicine and ruach in the Kabalistic 
tradition. According to Patanjali, a key way to enliven 
prana is through conscious breathing techniques known as 
pranayama. 

Pranayama means mastering the life force. There is an 
intimate relationship between your breath and your 
mind. When your mind is centered and quiet, so is your 
breath. When your mind is turbulent, your breathing 
becomes disordered. There are a number of classic pranayama breathing exercises that we will show you in chapter 

4 that are designed to cleanse, balance, and invigorate the 
body. Just as your breath is affected by your mental activity, your mind can be influenced by conscious regulation of 
your breathing. Pranayama is a powerful technology to 
enhance neurorespiratory integration. 

Prana is the life force that flows throughout nature and 
the universe. When you are tuned into the pranic energy 
in your body, you spontaneously become more attuned to 
the relationship between your individuality and your 
universality. In this way, pranayama can take you from a 
constricted state to an expanded state of awareness. 

The Fifth Branch of Yoga  -  
Pratyahara 

Patanjali encourages us to take time withdrawing our 
senses from the world to hear our inner voice more 
clearly. Pratyahara is the process of directing the senses 
inward to become aware of the subtle elements of sound, 
touch, sight, taste, and smell. Ultimately all experience is 
in consciousness. When you look at a flower in your garden, your eyes receive frequencies of electromagnetic 
radiation that trigger chemical reactions in the rods and 
cones at the back of your eyes. As a result of these 
chemical changes in your retinas, electrical impulses are 
generated that eventually reach the visual cortex at the 
back of your brain. The interpretation of these fluctuations in energy and information takes place in your 
consciousness. 

Although you imagine that you are seeing the flower 
outside of you, you are actually experiencing it within 
you on the screen of your awareness. This is why the 

great yogis say, "I am not in the world; the world is in me." 
Pratyahara is the process of tuning into your subtle 
sensory experiences known in yoga as the tanmatras. 
Within your awareness are the seeds of sound, sensation, 
sight, taste, and scent. By going inside yourself, you can 
access these impulses and directly experience the knowledge that the world of forms and phenomena is a projection of your awareness. 

You can awaken the tanmatras by consciously activating subtle sensory impressions on the screen of your 
awareness. Ask a friend to read these descriptions to you 
while your eyes are closed. 

Sound 

Imagine . . . 

the ringing of a church bell 

the buzzing of a mosquito in your ear 

the roar of an ocean wave crashing 

against the shore 

Touch 

Imagine . . . 

the feel of a fine cashmere sweater 

the softness of a baby 's skin 

drops of rain falling on your face during 

a summer shower 



Sight 



Imagine . . . 

a sunset over a calm ocean 

a fireworks display 

the face of your mother 

Taste 

Imagine . . . 

biting into a luscious fresh strawberry 

a spoonful of rich chocolate ice cream 

a pungent jalapeno pepper 

Smell 

Imagine . . . 

the smell of the rich earth after a spring rain 

the fragrance of blooming lilacs 

the aroma of a bakery 

Pratyahara is the process of temporarily withdrawing 
the senses from the outer world in order to recognize the 
sensations of your inner world. In a way, Pratyahara can be 
seen as sensory fasting. The word is comprised of prati, 
meaning "away," and ahara, meaning "food." If you stay 
away from food for a while, the next meal you take will 
usually taste exceptionally delicious. 

When your senses are withdrawn for a time, you are 
able to tune in to the subtler tastes and smells. Yoga suggests that the same is true for all your experiences in the 
world. If you take the time to withdraw from the world for 
a little while, you will find that your experiences are 
more vibrant. 

In practice, Pratyahara means paying attention to the 
sensory impulses you encounter throughout the day, 
limiting to the extent possible those that are toxic and 
maximizing those that are nourishing to your body, mind, 
and soul. 

Choose sounds, sensations, sights, tastes, and smells 
that inspire you. Be aware of and do your best to reduce 

situations, circumstances, and people who deplete you of 
your vitality and enthusiasm for life. When it comes to 
your yoga practice, Pratyahara means defining a space 
where you are less likely to be distracted by distressing sensations in your environment such as loud music, blaring 
television shows, and aggravating arguments, so you can 
bring your awareness to quieter realms within your consciousness. It means taking time on a daily basis to close 
your eyes so you can settle into more expanded states of 
awareness through meditation. 

The Sixth Branch of Yoga  -  
Dharana 

Dharana is the mastery of attention and intention. The 
world at its essential core is a quantum soup of energy and 
information. What you actually perceive is a selective act 
of your attention and interpretation. The difference 
between an apple and an orange or a rose and a carnation 
boils down to differences in the quantity and quality of the 
energy and information that comprise the object of your 
perception. Through your attention and intention, you 
freeze the energy and information contained in a fragrant, soft-petaled, thorny-stemmed flower and create a 
multisensory representation in your awareness that you 
identify as a rose. Without the unique biology of your 
human nervous system, the concept of a rose would only 
exist as a potential. 

Whatever you place your attention on grows in 
importance to you. Whether your attention is on building 
a business, becoming physically fit, improving a relationship, or developing a spiritual practice, the object of your 

attention is enlivened by your awareness and becomes a 
more predominant force in your life. By learning to value 
your attention as a precious commodity, you will be able to 
consciously create well-being and success in your life. An 
essential component of yoga is refining your attention in 
order to facilitate healing and transformation in your 
body/mind. 

Once you activate something with your attention, 
your intentions have a powerful influence on what things 
manifest in your life. According to yoga, your intentions 
have infinite organizing power. Your intention may be to 
heal an illness, create more love in your life, or become 
more aware of your own divinity. Simply by becoming 
clear about your intentions, you will begin to see them 
actualize in your life. When your awareness is established 
in being and you have a clear intention, nature rallies to 
help you fulfill your deepest desires. 

Be aware of your intentions. Make a list of the most 
important things you would like to see unfold in your life. 
Review them twice daily before you go into meditation. 
As your mind quiets down, release your intentions, surrendering your desires to the universe. Then pay attention 
to the clues that arise in your life that are directing you to 
the fulfillment of your desires. We'll explore attention 
and intention in greater depth in the next chapter. 

The Seventh Branch of Yoga  -  
Dhyana 

Dhyana is the development of witnessing awareness. It is 
the expression of knowing that you are in this world but 
not of this world. Throughout your life you have experi
ences, which change moment to moment. Your environment changes, your friends change, your employment 
changes, your body changes, your feelings change, your 
thoughts change. The only constant in life is perpetual 
change. Dhyana is the cultivation of your awareness so 
that in the midst of this unending change, you do not lose 
your self in the objects of your experience. Although situations, circumstances, people, and things are ever 
changing in your life, the aspect of you that is witnessing 
these changes is the essence of your being  -  your soul. 

The most direct way to cultivate this state of everpresent witnessing awareness is through meditation, 
during which you learn to observe the thoughts, feelings, 
sensations, and sounds that arise in your awareness 
without needing to react to them. As you develop this 
skill in meditation, you are able to apply it in your 
daily life. You learn to stay centered and awake to all 
possibilities whenever a challenge arises, so that you are 
able to choose the best course of action that will maximize 
the chances that your intentions and desires will be fulfilled. 

The Eighth Branch of Yoga  -  
Samadhi 

Samadhi is the state of being settled in pure, unbounded 
awareness. Going beyond time and space, beyond past 
and future, beyond individuality, Samadhi is tasting the 
realm of eternity and infinity. This is your essential 
nature. Immersing yourself in Samadhi on a regular basis 
catalyzes the transformation of your internal reference 
point from ego to spirit. You perform your actions in the 

world as an individual while your inner state is one of a 
universal being. 

This is a state of being in which fear and anxiety do 
not arise. You surrender your need to take yourself too seriously because you recognize that life is a cosmic play, and 
like a great actor, you perform your role impeccably but do 
not lose your real self in the character you're playing. 
This is the goal of yoga  -  to know yourself as a spiritual 
being disguised as a human being, to be established in 
union and perform action in harmony with the evolutionary flow of life. 

We've now explored the map of yoga as elaborated by 
Patanjali, the great voyager of inner space. In the next 
chapter, we'll delve into the principles that support the 
foundation of yoga  -  the Seven Spiritual Laws that govern 
the relationship between the body, mind, and soul. 




The Seven Spiritual 
Laws of Yoga 

Y 



If you can cease all restless activity, your integral 
nature will appear. 

 -  Lao Tzu 



We have reviewed the theoretical frameworks presented by two of the greatest yogis the world has 
known, Shankara and Patanjali. These closely related 
classic approaches remain as the cornerstones of yoga 
philosophy. In this chapter, we will apply the Seven Spiritual Laws of Success to the principles and practice of 
yoga. The Seven Spiritual Laws of Success are the laws of 
nature applied to the human experience. They are the 
principles through which the unmanifest becomes the 
manifest; through which spirit becomes the material universe. We believe there is value in applying the seven 




laws to the practice of yoga because the principles that 
underlie yoga are the principles that support a life of balance, flexibility, and vitality. The practice of yoga is practice for life. Success in yoga provides a template for 
success in life. 

The seven laws are presented below in a condensed 
form with a focus on their application to a yogic practice. 
Each law is associated with a specific mantra whose 
vibration resonates with the core principle. We encourage 
you to review the law of the day each morning when you 
awaken and each evening before bed for a few minutes. 
Throughout the day, bring the corresponding mantra 
into your awareness so that the energy of the law resonates within you. 

For years, people around the world have begun their 
days with a review of one of the laws and the intention to 
implement it throughout the day. We suggest that you 
focus on the first spiritual law of success on the Sunday of 
every week. Each subsequent day, put your attention on 
the next law, ending with the seventh law on Saturday. In 
this way, you will begin resonating with the millions of 
other people who are putting their attention on the 
Seven Spiritual Laws of Success. Let's review each of 
them as they apply to the practice of yoga. 

Day of the Week Spiritual Law 

Sunday Law of Pure Potentiality 

Monday Law of Giving and Receiving 

Tuesday Law of Karma (or Cause and 

Effect) 

Wednesday Law of Least Effort 

Thursday Law of Intention and Desire 

Friday Law of Detachment 

Saturday Law of Dharma (or Purpose 

in Life) 

Law 1 . The Law of Pure Potentiality 

The first spiritual law of success is the Law of Pure Potentiality, which states that at the core of your being you are 
pure awareness. This realm of pure awareness is the 
domain of all possibilities and underlies creativity in all its 
forms. Pure consciousness is your spiritual essence and 
the source of your joy in life. The realm of pure potentiality is the home of knowledge, intuition, balance, harmony, and bliss. Giving rise to thoughts, feelings, and 
actions, it remains undisturbed. This domain is the womb 
of silence that gives birth to all forms and phenomena in 
life. It is your essential nature. At your core you are pure 
potentiality. 

The silent ever-present witness is your true Self. The 
experience of the Self, or self -referral, means that your 
internal reference point is your soul rather than the 
objects of your experience. The opposite of self-referral is 
object-referral. In object-referral, you are influenced by 
what is happening outside the Self, which includes situations, circumstances, people, and things. In objectreferral, you need and therefore are constantly seeking 
the approval of others in order to feel comfortable and 
worthy. Because in object-referral your thoughts and 
behavior are always in anticipation of a response, it is a 
fear-based state of being. 

The ego is your internal reference in the state of 
object-referral. The ego, however, is not who you really 

are. Rather, it is your social mask, the roles you are playing. At one moment you play the role of friend, in the 
next the antagonist. You play the role of child in the 
presence of your parents and the role of parent when you 
are with your children. You play one role when speaking 
with your supervisor and another with those you supervise. 

Your social mask thrives on approval, strives to control, 
and is sustained by power. The corollary of this is that your 
ego lives in fear of losing approval, control, and power. 

But your true Self, your soul, is completely free of 
these things. It is immune to criticism, fears no challenge, and feels neither beneath nor above anyone. Your 
soul recognizes at its deepest level that everyone else is the 
same Self in different disguises. 

During the practice of yoga, the Law of Pure Potentiality reminds us that every movement emerges from the 
silent field of infinite possibility. The more powerful the 
silence, the more effective the movement. Every movement is a vibration, a wave on the ocean of life. The 
deeper the connection to the depths of the ocean, the 
more powerful is the wave that arises. 

While practicing your yoga poses, bring your attention 
back to the silent space within you between every movement and every posture. Remain in a state of mindful 
witnessing as you perform each pose, cultivating the 
experience of having your awareness in this nonlocalized 
domain of pure potentiality as you engage in activities 
localized in time and space. 

Enliven the Law of Pure Potentiality while performing 
yoga poses and throughout your day by taking the time to 
do the following three things: 

1. Cultivate stillness in your body and mind. 
Between poses and between movements, bring your 
attention to the quiet stillness within you. After performing your set of yoga postures, sit alone in silent 
meditation for approximately twenty minutes. By 
quieting the mind in meditation, you will learn to 
directly experience the field of pure awareness, where 
everything is inseparably connected with everything 
else. 

2. During your postures and during each day, practice 
shifting into a witnessing mode of awareness. 
Observe from the inner stillness of your soul the 
dynamic activity of the world. Take time each day to 
commune with nature and silently witness the intelligence within every living thing. Watch a sunset, listen 
to the sound of the ocean or a stream, or simply smell 
the scent of a flower. From the peace of your inner 
silence and through your communion with nature, 
you will experience joy and reverence for the eternal 
movement of life in all its manifestations. 

3. Practice nonjudgment. While performing your 
yoga postures, relinquish the need to judge your ability. Begin each session with the statement, "Today, I 
shall judge nothing that occurs," and remind yourself 
that self-acceptance is the source and goal of yoga. 
When you are constantly making judgments, including of yourself, as things being right or wrong, good or 
bad, you create turbulence in your internal dialogue, 
which constricts the flow of energy between you and 
the field of pure potentiality. Nonjudgment cultivates 
silence in the mind, which gives you direct access to 
the field of pure potentiality. 

Memorize the mantra, whose vibratory qualities resonate with the Law of Pure Potentiality, and silently 
repeat it a few times throughout the day to remind you 
that your essential nature is pure potentiality. 

Om Bhavam Namah 
I am absolute existence 



Law 2. The Law of Giving 
and Receiving 

The second spiritual law of success is the Law of Giving 
and Receiving, which states that the universe operates 
through dynamic exchange. Your body is in constant and 
dynamic exchange with the body of the universe. Your 
mind is dynamically interacting with the mind of the 
cosmos. Life is the flow of all the elements and forces 
that comprise the field of existence. The harmonious 
exchange between your physical body and the physical 
universe and between your personal mind and the collective mind is expressed as the Law of Giving and Receiving. Because your body, your mind, and the universe are in 
constant and dynamic exchange, stopping the circulation of energy is like stopping the flow of blood. Whenever blood stops flowing, it begins to clot, to coagulate. 
Whenever a river stops flowing, it begins to stagnate. 
This is why you must be open to giving and receiving in 
order to keep the life force circulating within you. 

The most important thing is the intention behind 
your giving and receiving. The intention should always be 
to create happiness for the giver and the receiver, because 
happiness is life-supporting and life-sustaining. The 

return is proportional to the giving when it is unconditional and from the heart. This is why the act of giving has 
to be joyful  -  the frame of mind has to be one in which 
you feel joy in the very act of giving. Then the energy 
behind the giving increases many times over. 

During your yoga practice, the Law of Giving and 
Receiving is lively in every breath you take. With each 
inhalation and exhalation, you are exchanging ten billion 
trillion atoms with your environment. Right now, take as 
deep a breath as you possibly can and hold it. Hold it as 
long as you can, and notice how uncomfortable you 
begin to feel when you are holding onto something that is 
meant to be released. Now, exhale as fully as you can and 
hold your breath with your lungs fully emptied. Again, feel 
the discomfort that arises when you are resisting taking in 
something that you need. Whenever you resist the Law of 
Giving and Receiving, your mind becomes anxious and 
your body becomes uncomfortable. 

With every pose you assume, complementary pairs of 
muscles are contracting and relaxing, holding and releasing in accordance with the Law of Giving and Receiving. 
When the life force is flowing freely through your 
body/mind, you are in natural alignment with the generosity and receptivity of the universe. 

Make the commitment to put the second law of success 
into effect in your yoga practice by taking the following 
three steps: 

1. During your yoga poses, maintain breathing 
awareness, effortlessly exchanging air with your environment through the inflow and outflow of your 

breath. Anytime throughout the day that you feel 
resistance in your body because things are not going 
the way you think they should, bring your attention to 
your breath and use it to regain your sense of effortless 
receiving and releasing. 

2. Cultivate the sense of gratitude for the gifts you 
have in your life. During your yoga practice, tune 
into the life force that is circulating through your 
body and be grateful for the opportunity to experience life through a human mind and body. Enjoy the 
sensation of your body contracting and expanding as 
your move through your postures. Celebrate your 
physical manifestation that enables your soul to 
express its meaning and purpose in life. Celebrate the 
very improbability of your existence. 

Our beloved teacher Brahmananda Saraswati 
once said that it might take a million incarnations 
until you gain a human nervous system; if you do not 
use it to remember and rejoice in your sacred nature, 
you have traded a diamond for a head of lettuce. 

3. During your practice of yoga have the intention of 
surrendering to the needs of your body. Rather than 
forcing your will upon your body to attain a specific 
pose, practice listening to the needs of your muscles 
and joints. The impulse to give flows naturally from 
the experience of gratitude. You will find that 
through this subtle shift in your attitude, challenging 
postures are more easily achieved. 

Outside of your asana practice have the intention to 
give something to everyone you come into contact with 
during the day. It might be a kind word, a compliment, a 

smile, a prayer, or a small gift. Similarly, be open to 
receiving the gifts that come to you during the day. They 
may be gifts from nature, such as the songs of birds, a 
spring shower, a rainbow, or a beautiful sunset. They may 
be gifts from people in your life  -  a warm embrace, a kind 
gesture, a helpful suggestion. Make the commitment to 
enliven the Law of Giving and Receiving by taking every 
opportunity to circulate love, caring, affection, appreciation, and acceptance. 

Learn the mantra whose vibratory qualities resonate 
with the Law of Giving and Receiving, and repeat it 
silently to yourself whenever you find yourself restricting 
the flow of giving and receiving in your life. 

Om Vardhanam Namah 
I am the nourisher of the universe 

Law 3. The Law of Karma 
(or Cause and Effect) 

The third spiritual law of success pertains to karma, or 
cause and effect. Every action we take generates a force of 
energy that returns to us in kind  -  as we sow, so we reap. 
When we consciously choose actions that bring happiness 
and success to others, the fruit of our karma is happiness 
and success. 

Although many people misinterpret the Law of 
Karma as imprisoning us in a cycle of unending reactivity, 
it is actually an assertion of human freedom. Karma 
implies the action of conscious choice-making for we are 
all infinite choice makers. In every moment of your existence, the real you resides in the field of pure potentiality 

where you have access to unlimited choices. Some of 
these choices are made consciously, while most are made 
unconsciously. The best way to understand and maximize 
the use of karmic law is to become consciously aware of 
the choices you make in every moment. 

Whether you like it or not, everything that is happening at this moment is a result of the choices you've 
made in the past. When you make choices unconsciously, 
you don't think they are choices, and yet they are. If you 
step back a moment and witness the choices you are 
making, then in just this act of witnessing you take the 
process from the unconscious into the conscious realm. In 
every situation, there is one choice out of the many 
available that will create happiness for you as well as for 
those around you. And when you make that one choice it 
will nourish you and everyone else influenced by that 
action. 

Applied to your practice of yoga, the Law of Karma is 
demonstrated as you consciously move through your postures aware of how there is a reaction for every action you 
execute. If in your impatience you force yourself into a 
pose that you are not fully ready to perform, your body/ 
mind will react, and the consequences of your straining 
will generate feelings of strain within you. On the other 
hand, when you move gracefully into the limits of each 
pose with an attitude of gentleness and finesse, your 
body/mind responds with effortlessness and ease. 

Notice that by slowing down your movements, you 
become more aware of the karmic consequences of your 
choices. If your body is unusually uncomfortable the 
morning after a yoga session, it is most likely the result of 
your ignoring the Law of Karma. You probably pushed 

too hard, making a less than ideal choice, and the karmic 
cost is your discomfort. 

Karma presents itself in your present by reminding 
you of your past. Choosing more consciously from the 
witnessing realm of quiet awareness, you make karmafree choices. 

Put the Law of Karma into effect in your yoga practice and 
your life so that you make the most evolutionary choices. 
Commit yourself to the following three steps: 

1. As you move through your yoga practice, witness 
the choices you make in each moment. In the witnessing of your choices, you will bring them into your 
conscious awareness. Be fully present in this moment 
and your next moment will not carry the consequences of the prior one. The best way to prepare for 
any moment in the future is to be fully conscious in 
the present. 

2. As you make your choice about how to move 
through resistance in your poses, ask yourself two 
questions: "What are the consequences of the choice 
I'm making?" and "Will this choice bring comfort?" 
When you make your choices outside of your practice 
of yoga, ask yourself, "Which choice is most likely to 
bring happiness and fulfillment to me and to those 
affected by my choice?" 

3. Then listen to your heart for guidance and be 
guided by its message of comfort or discomfort. Your 
heart is the junction point between your mind and 
your body. If the choice feels comfortable in your 
body, move into it with confidence. If the choice 



OO The Seven Spiritual Laws of Yoga 

feels uncomfortable, pause and see the consequences 
of your action with your inner vision. Honoring the 
guidance that is provided by your body's intelligence 
will help you make the most evolutionary choices for 
yourself and those in your life. 

Become familiar with the mantra whose vibratory 
qualities resonate with the Law of Karma and repeat it to 
yourself when you are making karmically significant 
choices. Thinking the mantra will remind you to listen to 
your body so your choice will be most likely to provide you 
with greater comfort and joy. 

Om Kriyam Namah 
M)> actions are aligned with cosmic law 



Law 4. The Law of Least Effort 

The Law of Least Effort states that nature's intelligence 
functions with effortless ease. If you look at the ebb and 
flow of the tides, the blossoming of a flower, or the movement of the stars, you do not see nature straining. There is 
rhythm and balance in the natural world, and when you 
are in harmony with nature, you can make use of the Law 
of Least Effort by minimizing your effort and maximizing 
your effect. 

When a Newtonian model of the world predominated in our collective awareness, the principles of force 
and effort were dominant. But in our modern era, when 
quantum physics provides the most comprehensive 
model of how the universe works, there is no place for 
force and effort. Rather, timing and finesse are the tools 

for transformation in a world that is understood as the 
expression of an underlying field of energy and information. Stated simply, the Law of Least Effort tells us that we 
can do less and accomplish more. 

Nature is held together by the energy of love, and 
least effort is expended when your actions are motivated 
by love. When your soul is your internal reference point, 
you can harness the power of love and use the energy creatively for healing, transformation, and evolution. 

The Law of Least Effort is of immeasurable value during the practice of yoga. Yoga is the antidote to the prescription "no pain, no gain." The greatest benefits of 
yoga come from relaxing into a pose, rather than forcing 
your body into it. When moving into a flexibility pose, 
find the point of resistance. Rather than muscling your 
way through this point, breathe into the resistance  -  surrender into the resistance  -  and you will find yourself 
extending your reach and enhancing your flexibility. 
Stay present with your full awareness in your body and 
engage an attitude of surrender. In yoga as in life, 
patience is a virtue. In yoga, the more you are able to 
embrace rather than fight your limitations and vulnerabilities, the less limits they hold and the more balance and 
energy you experience. 

To enliven the Law of Least Effort in your yoga practice 
and in your life, make a commitment to the following 
three steps: 

1. Practice acceptance. During your yoga practice, 
accept your body the way it is. Although you may 
have intention for it to change in some way, accept 
that how it is now is exactly as it should be, because 

the universe is as it should be. Give up your need to 
struggle against the whole universe by struggling 
against this moment. By acknowledging each situation 
as it exists, you are in the best position to help evolve 
it to a new level. 

In your daily life, practice accepting people as 
they are and circumstances as they occur, understanding that every moment in your life is the consequence of every prior choice you've made. Rather 
than resisting who or what is currently in your life, 
practice acceptance of what is present and reinforce 
your commitment to make more conscious choices 
from this moment on. 

2. Having accepted things as they are, take responsibility for the challenge you are facing. As applied to 
your yoga practice, this means making the commitment to nurture your body through appropriate exercise and nutrition. If you are seeking to change your 
body in a positive way, taking responsibility does not 
mean indulging in blame for the state of your body 
now. Remember that every challenge is an opportunity in disguise, and this alertness to opportunity 
allows you to take this moment and transform it for 
greater benefit. 

3. Establish your awareness in defenselessness. Do 
not waste your life energy defending your point of 
view or attempting to convince others. Remain open 
to all points of view without rigidly attaching yourself 
to any one of them. 

The third principle is of particular relevance to your 
yoga practice. There are many different schools of yoga 
without one right way. Every teacher and every system has 

its own variations on postures, pace, style, and intensity. 
As a system dedicated to awakening flexibility in body, 
mind, and spirit, yoga can accommodate and celebrate 
the many diverse approaches that have developed over 
past centuries. 

Experiment for yourself with different approaches 
and find the style that fits best with your needs at a given 
time of your life. The right yoga system for you is the one 
that enhances your vitality and flexibility. Commit yourself to the Law of Least Effort and you will cease wasting 
your vital energy in friction and conflict. Liberated, this 
energy becomes available to you for creativity, personal 
growth, and healing. 

Whenever you find yourself forcing an outcome that is not 
ready to manifest, remember the Law of Least Effort. 
Introduce the mantra that resonates with the principle 
that you can accomplish more by doing less if you are not 
wasting energy by struggling and straining. 

Om Daksham Namah 

M31 actions achieve maximal benefit 

with minimal effort 



Law 5. The Law of Intention and Desire 

The fifth spiritual law of success is the Law of Intention 
and Desire, which is based upon the recognition that at 
the level of the quantum field there is nothing other 
than energy and information. This quantum field, which 
is really just another name for the field of pure potentiality, is influenced by intention and desire. 

As a human being, you experience the quantum field 
subjectively as your own thoughts, feelings, memories, 
desires, needs, expectations, fantasies, and beliefs. You 
experience the same field objectively as your physical 
body and the physical world. At the level of the field, the 
collection of thoughts called your mind and the collection 
of molecules called your body are different disguises of 
the same underlying reality. The ancient yogic sages had 
an expression for this realization, "Tat Tvam Asi," which 
translates as, "I am that, you are that, all this is that, and 
that's all there is." 

If you accept that your personal body is not separate 
from the body of the universe, then by consciously 
changing the energy and informational content of your 
own body, you can influence the energy and information 
of your extended body  -  your environment, your world. 
This influence is activated by two qualities inherent in 
consciousness: attention and intention. Attention enlivens 
while intention transforms. 

If you want something to grow stronger in your life, 
direct more of your attention to it. If you want something 
to diminish in your life, withdraw your attention from it. 
Intention, on the other hand, catalyzes the transformation 
of energy and information into new forms and expressions. According to ancient yogic principles, your intention has organizing power. 

Accomplished yogis are masters of attention and 
intention. They can influence components of their physiology in ways that modern science used to think were 
impossible. Yogis can raise and lower their blood pressure, speed up or slow down their heart rates, increase or 
decrease their body temperature, and bring their respira
tory system and metabolic activity to almost imperceptible 
levels. In chapter 5, we will show you how to use your 
attention and intention for healing and transformation. 
As you become increasingly adept at governing your own 
body through the Law of Intention and Desire, you will 
also experience your intentions being increasingly supported by nature. 

You can learn to harness the power of the Law of Intention and Desire in your yoga practice and in your life by 
following these three steps: 

1. Be clear about your intentions and desires. On a 
regular basis, take the time to write down a list of 
those things you would like to see manifest in your life. 
Review your intentions and desires prior to beginning your yoga practice and prior to your time of 
silent meditation. Modify your list as your desires are 
fulfilled or transformed and observe how your intentions and desires evolve. When you take the time to 
document what you desire in your heart and mind, you 
accelerate the process of manifesting your desires in 
the world. 

2. Even as you bring your intentions and desires into 
conscious awareness, surrender the outcome to 
nature. Cultivate an attitude of trusting that when 
things are not going exactly the way you intend them 
to, there is a grander design at work. You can probably 
identify times in your life when things were not going 
according to your plan, only to realize later that something better was waiting for you around the corner. 

When performing your yoga poses, maintain this 
inner attitude of surrender. Attend to and release 

your intentions as you move through your postures 
and watch the result in your yoga practice and in 
your life. 

3. Remind yourself to practice present moment 
awareness in all your actions. Do not allow any obstacles to consume or dissipate the quality of your attention in the present moment. As you engage in a pose, 
be fully in the present, remembering that being in the 
moment empowers your most cherished intentions 
and desires. 

As you energize your intentions and desires with your 
attention, introduce the mantra that resonates with the 
Law of Intention and Desire. 

Om Ritam Namah 

M31 intentions and desires are supported 

by cosmic intelligence 



Law 6. The Law of Detachment 

The sixth spiritual law of success is the Law of Detachment, which reveals a great paradox of life. In order to 
acquire something in this world, you have to relinquish 
your attachment to it. This doesn't mean you give up the 
intention to fulfill your desire  -  you simply give up your 
attachment to the outcome. 

Attachment is based on fear and insecurity. When 
you forget that the only genuine source of security is your 
true self, you begin believing that you need something 
outside yourself in order to be happy. You may believe 
that a certain amount of money in the bank, paying off 

the mortgage on your house, obtaining a luxury car, losing 
ten pounds, or purchasing a new outfit may result in 
greater feelings of security within yourself. Unfortunately, whenever your happiness is based upon something 
other than your true Self, insecurity arises because you 
know at a deep level of your being that whatever is bringing you happiness can be lost and therefore has the 
potential to bring you pain. 

According to the principles of yoga, the only true 
security comes from your willingness to embrace the 
unknown, the realm of uncertainty. By relinquishing 
your attachment to the known, you step into the field of 
pure potentiality in which the wisdom of uncertainty is 
factored into all your choices. Practicing detachment and 
embracing uncertainty, you relinquish your need to hold 
on to the past, which is the only thing that is known. 
Being open to what is happening rather than trying to 
control how things unfold, you experience the excitement, adventure, exhilaration, and mystery of life. 

Applied to your practice of yoga, the Law of Detachment encourages you to relinquish your attachment to an 
idealized pose. Rather than seeking only to achieve the 
perfect posture, have the intention for your practice to 
awaken deeper and more expanded levels of awareness 
within you. By relinquishing your attachment to an idealized form and allowing your awareness to embrace the 
essence of yoga, your body will naturally release its resistance, increase its flexibility, and will improve as a side 
benefit for your detachment. 

Yoga is not a competitive sport, and you will not 
achieve integration of body, mind, and spirit through force 
and effort. Rather, yoga is a system of mindful surrender. 

The practice of yoga accomplishes its goal of union 
through attention and intention  -  through the conscious 
release of conflict and struggle. This is the essence of the 
Law of Detachment. Have your intentions clearly in your 
awareness while you maintain an attitude of Thy will be 
done. The coexistence of these apparently contradictory 
forces  -  intention and detachment  -  cultivates the flexibility that enables you to fulfill all your goals in life. 

Put the Law of Detachment into effect in your yoga practice and in your life by making a commitment to the 
following three steps: 

1. Practice detachment. The goal of yoga is flexibility, for which detachment is an essential feature. 
Detachment and flexibility go hand in hand. Attachment breeds rigidity. Commit not to rigidly impose 
your ideas of how things should be. Allow yourself 
and those around you the freedom to be natural. 
Notice that when you force solutions on problems, 
you often create new problems that did not previously exist. Remind yourself to engage in everything 
with detached involvement. 

2. Embrace uncertainty as an essential ingredient of 
your experience and watch how creative solutions 
to problems spontaneously emerge out of chaos. 
Cultivate an attitude of curiosity and innocence as 
you live your life and notice how a deep inner security 
develops within you, independent of things around 
you. 

3. Surrender to the field of pure potentiality. Combine your focused intention with detachment from 

the outcome and observe how easily you are able to 
fulfill your desires while maintaining your center, 
even in the midst of confusion and turbulence. 

Introduce the mantra that resonates with the Law of 
Detachment to remind you to relinquish your need to 
control, thereby allowing creative solutions to emerge 
from the wisdom of uncertainty. 

Om Anandham Namah 

M31 actions are blissfully free from 

attachment to outcome 



Law 7. The Law of Dharma 
(or Purpose in Life) 

The seventh spiritual law is the Law of Dharma, which 
states that every sentient being has a purpose in life. You 
have unique abilities and your own way of expressing 
them. There are needs in this world for which your specific talents are ideally suited, and when the world's 
needs are matched with the creative expression of your 
talents, your purpose  -  your dharma  -  is realized. 

To be in dharma, your life force must flow effortlessly 
without interference. The practice of yoga provides a 
direct mechanism to release energy blockages in your 
body. When obstacles to the flow of your vital energy are 
removed, you become capable of expressing more 
expanded aspects of your self. Increasing compassion, 
wisdom, and playfulness are evidence that your life is 
flowing in accordance with the Law of Dharma. 

There are three major components to the Law of 

Dharma. The first is that your ultimate purpose is to 
discover your higher Self. Pursue the god or goddess 
inside you that wants to express the sacred purpose for 
which you were born. Awaken to the unbounded, eternal 
witnessing awareness that is the essence of who you are 
and know yourself as a timeless, eternal Being in the 
midst of time-bound experience. 

The second component of the Law of Dharma is to 
acknowledge and express your unique talents. Take the 
time to honor your innate gifts by making a list of those 
things that you do well. One way to connect with your 
dharma is to consider those things that you really love to 
do. Make a list of the things that bring joy to you and to 
others while you are doing them. It might be singing, 
playing the piano, teaching gymnastics, or cooking. You 
may be naturally good at deep listening or caring for 
those in need. Whatever your unique talents may be, 
expressing them brings happiness and satisfaction to you 
and to others. When you are in the flow of your dharma, 
expressing your unique talents, time loses its hold on you 
and you enter into timeless awareness. 

The third component of dharma is serving others. 
True dharmic actions naturally bring benefit both to you 
and to those affected by your actions. 

The inner dialogue of a person in his or her dharma is, 
"How can I serve?" and "How can I help?" The answers to 
these questions will allow you to serve your fellow human 
beings with love and compassion. Expressing your gifts in 
service to others is the highest expression of the Law of 
Dharma. When your creative expressions match the needs 
of your fellow humans, abundance flows into your life. 

Yoga is action in accordance with dharma. Moving 

your body with awareness and impeccability is the 
essence of a life in harmony with the laws of nature. 
Every cell, tissue, and organ in your body has its dharma, 
which is to perform its unique function while supporting 
the wholeness of the body. The digestive tract performs its 
job of secreting gastric juices, moving food along its 
pathway, absorbing nutrients, and eliminating toxins. 
The endocrine system secretes its vital hormones that 
regulate metabolism, reproduction, growth, and repair. 
The circulatory system regulates blood pressure and cardiac output. While each of these systems has its specific 
role to perform, the essential purpose of their existence is 
to support the whole physiology. 

Your practice of yoga supports the dharma of your 
body. When life energy is flowing effortlessly through 
every cell, tissue, and organ, the dharma of each is being 
fulfilled. When as a result of the flexibility, balance, and 
strength gained during your yoga practice you are effortlessly able to express your talents in the world, you are 
aligned with the Law of Dharma. When you allow the 
intelligence and vital energy of nature to flow through 
you, you are reminded of your highest purpose  -  serving 
the world and supporting the evolutionary flow 
of life. 

Put the Law of Dharma into effect in your yoga practice 
and in your life by commiting to the following three 

steps: 

1. Pay attention to the quiet stillness within you that 
animates your body and mind. During your yoga practice and during the day, bring your attention to the 
silent witness that observes your thoughts and actions. 

2. Become aware of your unique talents and those 
things you love to do while expressing your unique talents. In your practice of yoga, notice the postures 
that you enter into easily and use this information 
to become more intimate with your nature. Some 
people are naturally flexible, some have inherently 
good muscle strength, while others have innately 
good balance. Celebrate your natural talents even 
as you strive to develop other ones in yoga and in 
your life. 

3. Cultivate an inner conversation of helping and 
serving. When your intentions behind every action 
are to align with dharma, your actions will be effortless 
and successful. By asking the questions, How can I 
help? and How can I serve? you will fulfill your 
deeper purpose in life. 

Use the mantra that resonates with the Law of 
Dharma is to remind you of the Law of Dharma, particularly when you are experiencing struggle and strife. Using 
the mantra will help shift your inner conversation from 
What's in it for me? to How can I help? 

Om Varunam Namah 
IsAy life is in harmony with cosmic law 



Implement Your Insights 

So far we have explored the theory and philosophy of 
yoga. Yoga is as much a science of action as it is a way 
of thinking about life. In the next chapters, we will 
present the essential technologies that when practiced 

spontaneously implement the theory of yoga into the 
experience of life. Meditation, regulating the life force, 
learning to hold and circulate energy, and moving with 
awareness are the fundamental technologies that need to 
be mastered for you to gain the full benefits of yoga on the 
level of your body, your mind, and your soul. 



Y 



Part II 



Meditation and 
Bteathing 




Meditation 

Calming a Turbulent Mind 

Y 



Empty the cup. 

 -  Zen master Nan-in 



Your mind is a thought-generating organ. Thought 
forms perpetually arise in your awareness. If you try to 
stop your thoughts with the intention of creating stillness 
in your mind, your mental activity may quiet for a few 
moments, but it will almost certainly start up again at full 
speed. 

The activity in your mind is communicated to every 
cell in your body. When your mind is turbulent, your 
messenger molecules communicate turbulence to your 
cells, tissues, and organs. If you can quiet your mind, you 
can send messages of peace and harmony to every cell in 
your body. To experience the real essence of yoga  -  the full 




integration of body, mind, and spirit  -  you need to 
develop the ability to calm your mental turbulence. 

A thought is a packet of energy and information. 
According to yoga, all thoughts can be classified as either 
memories or desires. When your mind is active, you are 
either thinking about something that happened in the 
past or are anticipating something occurring in the 
future. The Sanskrit word for memory or past impression is 
sanskara, while the word for desire is vasana. 

Impressions give rise to desires. If you see an advertisement for a flashy car, a tropical vacation spot, or a 
designer dress, an impression is laid down in your mind 
that may give rise to a desire. As a result of this desire, you 
are compelled to take some new action, such as going to a 
car dealership, calling your travel agent, or visiting your 
local boutique. 

The action that emerges from the desire is called 
karma. This endless cycle of impressions giving rise to 
desires giving rise to actions resulting in new impressions 
is the circuitry that keeps your mind perpetually active. 
We can think of this circuit of sanskara, vasana, and 
karma as the software of your soul. As long as you are 
thinking, your mind is churning through the cycle of 
action . . . impression . . . desire . . . action . . . impression 
. . . desire . . . action. 

Meditation is the technology that enables you temporarily to escape from this cycle. Through the process 
of gently focusing your attention (known in yoga as 
Dharana) while innocently witnessing the thought forms 
that come and go in your mind (Dhyana), you enter into 
the gap between thoughts, glimpsing the domain of 
unbounded awareness (Samadhi). Taking your mind from 

constricted to expanded awareness, meditation offers the 
most direct path to awakening the Law of Pure Potentiality in your life. 

Your choices are limited while your mind is engaged in 
a particular memory or desire. People frequently get 
caught in habitual ruts of thinking, believing that they are 
stuck in a situation because they cannot imagine any 
other possibilities. Accessing the field of pure potentiality 
by going beyond conditioning through meditation opens 
up creative possibilities that previously were unavailable. 

Meditation can take many different forms, but there is 
a common theme. In every technique of meditation, the 
process takes you out of the conditioned mind and opens 
up access to the nonconditioned mind. This is accomplished by experiencing a thought in its less distinct, 
more refined aspects until eventually you experience the 
thought as it emerges from the nonlocal field of your 
awareness. As you become increasingly familiar with the 
experience of thoughts condensing from consciousness, 
your identity begins shifting from your mind to your soul. 

You can focus on and refine your perception of 
objects in any sensory modality. You can use music, 
chanting, drumming, or the sound of your own breath as 
a focus of your attention in meditation. You can use 
visual symbols, a candle flame, pictures of people you 
love, or a sunset to expand your consciousness. You can go 
from local to nonlocal awareness through the sense of 
touch  -  from therapeutic massage to sexual rapture. You 
can even momentarily go beyond time and space through 
the sense of taste and smell. 

For every experience in the mind, it is possible to 
refine that experience so your awareness is less constricted 



oO The Seven Spiritual Laws of Yoga 

and more expanded. This expanded state of mind is the 
ultimate expression of the Law of Pure Potentiality, for all 
possibilities reside in and emerge from this field of 
unbounded awareness. 

Before it arises in your mind, a thought is in this 
domain of consciousness that is transcendent to thought, 
a domain accessible through meditation. An ancient 
powerful meditation technique involves asking the question, Who is having these thoughts? By repeated inquiry, 
you reach the awareness that thoughts arise from a 
deeper domain of awareness over which your mind really 
has no control. 

In the yoga tradition, meditation classically involves 
the use of a mantra or primordial sound. The word 
mantra means "instrument or vehicle of the mind." 
Mantras are used to take your awareness from engagement in the changing realm of life to immersion in the 
expanded state of being that is beyond beginnings and 
endings. These vibrations, used for thousands of years to 
quiet mental activity, are pleasing, resonant sounds that 
do not have specific meanings to keep your mind active. 
The mind stays active through the process of association. 
If you listen to your mind, it may sound like this: 

I need to reduce my credit card debt ... I really 
didn't need to buy that sweater last week ... I did 
need something to wear to Stan's party . . . The 
food was really great ... I wish I hadn't eaten 
so much ... I am definitely going to start exercising next week ... I am going to try to get Tanya 
to go out with me ... I wonder if she got the job 
she was applying for . . . and on . . . and on . . . 
and on . . . 



Meditation 8l 

Introducing a mantra temporarily interrupts the 
incessant association process that keeps the mind active. 
Introducing a thought that does not carry meaning 
momentarily breaks the cycle and allows you to glimpse 
the silent space between your thoughts. This starts the 
transformation of your identity from mind to spirit. 

The best-known mantra is the sound Aum or Om, 
traditionally said to be the sound the universe makes 
when it manifests from potential to perceptual. Using the 
sound that represents the junction point between local 
and nonlocal can take your awareness back to the field of 
awareness that gives rise to the mind. 

At the Chopra Center, we teach a mantra meditation 
technique called Primordial Sound Meditation, which 
assigns a person one of 108 mantras based upon the date 
and place of a person's birth. This requires personalized 
instruction, which is available through our certified meditation instructors in most cities throughout the world. 

According to the theory that underlies Primordial 
Sound Meditation, the universe expresses a different 
vibratory frequency at different times during the day. You 
can appreciate this principle by considering how the 
environment feels different at dawn from the way it does 
at high noon or at dusk. Over the course of a lunar 
month, the "sound" of the world changes about 108 
times. One of these 108 sounds is assigned based upon the 
time, date, and place of a person's birth. This primordial 
sound or mantra is said to represent the sound of the cosmos at the doorway between potentiality and individuality because until we emerge through the birth canal we are 
potential human beings. This primordial sound can be 
used as a meditation vehicle to take you back through the 



o2 The Seven Spiritual Laws of Yoga 

doorway from individuality to universality  -  the ultimate 
goal of meditation. 



Chakra Meditation 

A different type of meditation involves intoning mantras 
aloud to create a healing resonance in the mind and 
body. There are mantras associated with each of the 
seven energy centers in the body, known as chakras. The 
chakras are major junction points between consciousness 
and the body, and each one is associated with a specific 
vibration. Envisioned by the ancient seers as wheels or 
vortices of life force, they sometimes have been associated 
with major neural networks or hormonal systems. 



Chakra 



Neural 
Association 

Sacral plexus 

Lumbar plexus 



First  -  Root 

Second  -  
Creativity 

Third  -  Energy 

Fourth  -  Heart 

FifthExpression 

Sixth  -  Intuition Carotid plexus 

Seventh  -  Cerebral cortex 

Consciousness 



Solar plexus 
Cardiac plexus 
Cervical plexus 



Hormonal 

Association 

Adrenal glands 

Reproductive 
glands 

Pancreas (insulin) 

Thymus gland 

Thyroid gland 

Pituitary gland 
Pineal gland 



Each center identifies a core human need. When the 
center is open, the energy that flows through the chakra 
allows you to meet those needs more effortlessly. If there is 

a blockage in one area of the body/mind system, energy 
becomes stagnant and your intentions are more difficult to 
actualize. You can activate each center by putting your 
attention in the location of the chakra and sounding the 
associated mantra aloud. 

To begin this meditation, sit comfortably with your 
spine upright. Close your eyes and visualize the site of the 
energy center you wish to focus on. Take a deep breath, 
and on the inhalation, chant the mantra in one long 
syllable. Feel the sensations in your body and notice the 
sense of alert calm in your mind after each mantra. Envision energy flowing effortlessly from 
the base of your spine through the 
different energy centers and rising up through the top of your 
head. Notice how you feel in 
the meditation and how it 
affects you when you return to 
your active life. 

The First Center: Root Chakra 

The root chakra, known in Sanskrit as Muladhara, is 
located at the base of the spine. It governs your most 
basic survival needs. When energy is flowing freely 
through this center, you have confidence that you can 
meet your core needs without struggle. When there is 
blockage in this area, you will tend to experience anxiety 
and worry. 

The Law of Karma governs the first energy center. 
On the physical plane, every action you perform results 
in a corresponding reaction. To maximize the possibility 


that your actions generate evolutionary reactions, you 
can use your body as a choice-determining instrument. 
Consider the possibilities in front of you and listen to the 
signals from your body. These sensations generating 
from the root chakra are either comfortable or uncomfortable. 

Your body evaluates every possible decision in terms 
of its likelihood to meet your needs for safety or increase 
the level of threat you experience. The first chakra, 
which connects you with the earth, provides essential 
information as to the potential nourishment or toxicity 
that is available to you as a result of the actions you 
are taking. Keeping energy open and flowing in this 
source chakra is key to both physical and emotional 
abundance. 

The color for this energy center is red. It is associated 
with the element earth and the sense of smell. 

The mantra for the first chakra is Lam. 

The Second Center: 
Creativity Chakra 

The second chakra, called Svadhisthana, is associated 
with creativity in all its expressions. It is located in the 
area of your sexual organs, and the energy of this center 
can be used for biological reproduction. When channeled into higher energy centers, it fuels the creative 
force that enables you to paint a beautiful picture, write a 
novel, play music, build a business, or create a life of love 
and abundance. 

The Law of Least Effort is lively in the second chakra. 

When your vital energy is flowing through your center or 
creativity, you cocreate your life. 

The solution to every problem is rarely on the level of 
the problem. Rather, it comes from a deeper domain of creativity. Creativity is the process of taking the same raw 
material and creating different contexts and relationships 
between the components. When a painter creates a masterpiece of art, she weaves the pigments in a way that 
results in a unique creation. When a composer creates a 
new piece of music, he is using the same notes in a new 
relationship with each other, resulting in the emergence of 
something that did not exist before. A novelist creates a 
new relationship between letters and words, enabling a 
story to manifest that had not previously existed. 

When you are aligned with your creative juices, the 
expressions that emerge arise effortlessly. The second 
chakra utilizes the raw material of the root chakra to create the world anew each day. 

The color for the second energy center is orange. It is 
associated with the element of water and the sense of taste. 

The mantra for the second chakra is Vara. 



The Third Center: Energy Chakra 

The third chakra, Manipura, is localized in your solar 
plexus. It is the seat of your power in the world. When this 
center is open and flowing, you are capable of translating 
your intentions and desires into manifestation. When it is 
blocked, you feel frustrated and ineffectual. 

The seeds of intentions and desires reside in your personal soul. Nourishing the seeds you wish to germinate 

with your attention will lead to their full expression. The 
Law of Intention and Desire governs the third chakra. It is 
important to be clear about your intentions so you are not 
surprised when they bear fruit. The process of manifesting 
your desires is first to bring them into consciousness, 
then expand your awareness through meditation, then 
release your intentions and detach from the outcome. 

You can control your actions, but you cannot control 
the fruit of your actions. Keep your life energy flowing 
freely through your third chakra and the light and heat of 
your intentions will radiate to the world. 

The color for the third energy center is yellow like the 
sun. It is associated with the element of fire and the sense 
of sight. 

The mantra to clear and enliven the third chakra is 
Ram. 

The Fourth Center: Heart Chakra 

The fourth chakra represents the unifying energy of love 
and compassion. Known as Anahata, the heart chakra is 
dedicated to overcoming separation and division. When 
the heart center is blocked, there is a sense of alienation 
from others. When the heart center is open and flowing, 
you feel connected at a deep level to all beings in your life. 
The Law of Giving and Receiving governs the heart 
chakra. Love can take many different forms at different 
stages of life. The love of a child for his mother is different 
from a mother's love for her child. A friend's love is 
different from a passionate lover's love or the love of 
a student for his teacher. The common thread in each of 
these expressions of love is the impulse to unify  -  

to overcome separation. This is the nature of the heart. 

The Law of Giving and Receiving as expressed 
through the fourth chakra establishes the principle that 
the heart is the organ that circulates love. The relationship between the physical heart and the emotional heart 
is more than metaphorical. Studies have shown that in 
patients with recent heart attacks, men who believe that 
their spouses love them suffer fewer complications and 
have better outcomes then men who are in conflicted 
marriages. People who perceive the world as hostile have 
a higher risk of premature heart attacks than those who 
feel the world is a nurturing place. Just the simple act of a 
cardiac nurse calling to check on the well-being of 
patients recently discharged from a coronary care unit 
can reduce the risk of rehospitalization. 

Every act of giving is simultaneously an act of receiving. Each time you welcome a gift into your life you are 
providing the opportunity for someone to give. Just as a 
healthy physical heart receives blood from the periphery 
which it then oxygenates and pumps back out, your emotional heart stays healthy by receiving and giving love in 
all its forms. 

The color of the fourth energy center is green. When 
flowing, it is the green of nourishment; when congested, it 
can be green with envy. It is associated with the element 
of air and the sense of touch. 

The mantra that awakens the fourth chakra is Yum. 

The Fifth Center: Expression Chakra 

The throat chakra, called Vishuddha in Sanskrit, is the 
center of expression. When it is open and flowing, you 

have the confidence that you are capable of communicating your needs. When the fifth chakra is obstructed, 
a person will often feel that he is not being heard. To 
feel alive and empowered, it is important that this 
energy center is clear. Energy blockages in this area are 
often associated with thyroid problems or chronic neck 
pain. 

The Law of Detachment governs the throat chakra. 
An open fifth chakra enables you to express your truth 
without concern for censors or critics. This does not 
mean you say things that are intentionally hurtful or 
insensitive. On the contrary, people with open centers of 
communication are skillful in expressing their needs in 
ways that are life-supporting. Anxiety over how people 
will react to your views does not arise when energy is 
flowing freely through the chakra of expression. 

The Law of Detachment reminds you that you can 
choose your words and actions, but you cannot control the 
response to your words and actions. When your intentions are clear and your heart is open, you will spontaneously demonstrate right speech, trusting that the 
universe will handle the details. 

The color of the fifth energy center is blue. It is 
associated with the elements of ether or space and the 
sense of hearing. 

The mantra to open the fifth chakra is Hum. 

The Sixth Center: Intuition Chakra 

The sixth energy center is sometimes known as the third 
eye. Located in the forehead, Ajna, as it is known in 
Sanskrit, is the center of insight and intuition. When 

this center is open, you have a deep sense of connection 
to your inner voice and feel guided in your choices. 
When it is blocked, there is a sense of self-doubt and 
distrust. The opening of this chakra is usually associated 
with a clear sense of connection to one's dharma or 
purpose in life. 

The Law of Dharma or Purpose in Life governs the 
sixth chakra. You have within you a wise voice guiding 
you to express the highest aspects of your nature. Listen to 
this inner still voice, which is guiding you to manifest 
your full potential. Quiet the internal turbulence that is 
filled with the voices of others so you can identify the 
sound of your own soul. It has only one desire  -  for you to 
remember your essential nature as a spark of the divine. 

The color of the sixth energy center is indigo. It is 
associated with extrasensory perceptual abilities such as 
clairvoyance, clairaudience, and remote viewing. The 
sense is inner sound, independent of outside vibrations. 

The mantra to awaken the sixth chakra is Sham. 

The Seventh Center: 
Consciousness Chakra 

This center, known as Sahaswara, is visualized as a lotus 
flower at the crown of the head. When the lotus unfolds 
its petals, the memory of wholeness is restored. You 
remember that your essential nature is unbounded and 
that you are spirit in disguise as a person. This is the full 
expression of yoga  -  the unification of being with action, 
of universality with individuality. 

The Law of Pure Potentiality governs the seventh 
chakra. When your roots are receiving nourishment from 

the earth in the first chakra, your creative juices are flowing in the second, your intentions are empowered in the 
third, your heart is open and exchanging love with those 
around you in the fourth, you are spontaneously expressing your highest self in the fifth, and you are in touch with 
your inner voice in the sixth, then energy moves into the 
crown chakra and you remember your essential nature as 
infinite and unbounded. The thousand-petaled lotus 
flower unfolds and you know yourself as a spiritual being 
temporarily localized to a body and mind. 

As you recognize the universality underlying your 
individuality, you gain access to your full potential. Your 
identity shifts from local to nonlocal, from constricted 
to expanded. Fear and anxiety dissipate because you 
lose your attachment to specific outcomes, trusting that 
the universe is unfolding in the most evolutionary way 
possible. 

The color of the seventh energy center is violet. It is 
associated with the sense of compassion that comes from 
recognizing another as a reflection of yourself. The sense 
is the inner light that radiates from the eternal flame of 
sacred wisdom. 

The mantra to nurture the seventh chakra is Aum. 

So Hum Meditation 

Every meditation technique offers something of value to 
the mind and body. We believe that procedures that 
quiet your mind allow you to glimpse the silent space 
between thoughts and help expand consciousness and 
heal the body. A very simple, effective, and easily learned 
meditation technique uses the breath along with a 

breathing mantra to quiet the mind and relax the body. If 
you are unable to receive personal instruction from a Primordial Sound Meditation teacher, the So Hum meditation described below will help take your awareness from a 
constricted to an expanded state of consciousness, aligning you with the Law of Pure Potentiality. 

We recommend that you practice this technique for 
twenty to thirty minutes twice daily. We encourage you to 
perform it soon after awakening and again before dinner. 
Although some people find that if they meditate before 
bed they may have difficulty getting to sleep, you may find 
that by meditating at bedtime, you are able to turn off 
your mental turbulence from the day's activity and fall 
asleep easily after you have completed your meditation 
practice. 

1. Sit comfortably where you will not be disturbed 
and close your eyes. 

2. For a few minutes simply observe the inflow and 
outflow or your breath. 

3. Now take a slow, deep breath through your nose 
while thinking the word So. 

4. Exhale slowly through your nose while thinking 
the word Hum. 

5. Allow your breathing to flow easily, silently 
repeating, So . . . Hum . . . with each inflow and 
outflow of your breath. 

6. Whenever your attention drifts to thoughts in 
your mind, sounds in your environment, or sensations in your body, gently return to your breath, 
silently repeating, So . . . Hum. 

7. Continue this process for twenty to thirty minutes 
with an attitude of effortlessness and simplicity. 

8. When the time is up, sit with your eyes closed for 
a couple of minutes before resuming your daily 
activity. 

Meditation Experiences 

Although you may have a variety of experiences in your 
meditation practice, it is easy to classify them into a few 
basic categories. 

Mantra Awareness 

Your repetition of the So Hum mantra should be effortless. 
Silent repetition of the sound does not require clearly 
pronouncing it in your mind. Rather, have just a vague 
sense of the mantra, as a vibration, an impulse, or a subtle 
sound. Listen for its sound more than feel the pressure to 
articulate it. Whenever the mantra appears to be changing 
in its rate, rhythm, or pronunciation, allow it to transform 
without controlling the process. 

Thought Awareness 

The most common complaint that new meditators 
express is that they are having too many thoughts. 
Thoughts are a natural component of meditation, and it is 
not possible to forcibly stop thinking. There will be many 
times in every meditation during which your mind drifts 
off the mantra to thoughts. You may find yourself thinking 
about something that has happened in the past or something you are anticipating happening in the future. You 

may find yourself thinking about sensations in your body 
or sounds in your environment. 

During this period of meditation, when you become 
aware that your attention has drifted away from the 
mantra, easily shift it back. Whether you are thinking 
about what you want for lunch, a movie you saw yesterday, 
an issue at work, or some profound cosmic realization, 
when you recognize that you have drifted off into thinking 
about something  -  anything  -  gently, and without straining, return your attention to the mantra. 

Sleep 

If your body is fatigued when it is time to meditate, you 
may drift off to sleep. Don't fight the urge to sleep. Meditation is an opportunity for your body/mind to rebalance, 
and if it needs to rest, allow it to do so. When you 
awaken, sit up and meditate, using your mantra, for about 
ten minutes. 

If you find yourself falling asleep in most of your meditations, you are probably not getting enough rest at 
night. Restful sleep is an important component of a balanced lifestyle. Be sure that you are exercising regularly, 
avoiding unnecessary stimulants during the day, and 
eliminating alcohol from your diet, particularly before 
bed. Try to be in bed with the lights off by 10 P.M. 

Pure Awareness 

As your mind quiets during meditation, you will experience moments when there is the absence of thoughts 
with the retention of awareness. We call this experience 
going into the gap. There is no mantra, and there are no 

thoughts. The mind has temporarily relinquished its 
attachment to time and space and is immersed in the 
eternal, infinite realm of pure awareness. This is the 
experience sometimes known as samadhi. With regular 
practice, the expansive awareness that you glimpse during 
meditation begins to permeate your life outside of meditation. The relaxation you gain while meditating extends 
into your activity. The ability to consciously experience 
nonlocal and local awareness simultaneously is the 
essence of yoga  -  established in a state of unity consciousness while being fully engaged in the world of forms and 
phenomena. 

All of the Seven Spiritual Laws are in play during meditation. The process is governed by the Law of Pure 
Potentiality, which takes your mind to the domain of all 
possibilities beyond thought. Allowing mental activity to 
come and go without restriction expresses the principle of 
the Law of Giving and Receiving. Not indulging in the 
meaning of the thoughts that arise allows you to transcend the Law of Karma. The core principle of meditation 
is the Law of Least Effort, for the nonlocal field of awareness is also the domain of least effort. The state of nonlocal 
awareness, beyond thought, time, space, and causality, 
cannot be accessed through force. You utilize the Law of 
Intention and Desire by having the intention to relinquish your need to control, resist, or anticipate during the 
practice of meditation. The Law of Detachment is essential, for the only way to get to the field of unbounded 
awareness is by letting go. Finally, the Law of Dharma is 
active because it is the nature of the mind to seek everexpanding realms of bliss and wisdom. It is the dharma of 

the mind to expand during meditation. Letting go and 
allowing the process to proceed innocently is the proven 
technique of going beyond thought and quieting the 
mind. 

Attention and Intention 
Meditation 

As you become adept at calming the commotion in your 
mind through meditation, you can enliven healing and 
transformation in your body through conscious attention 
and intention. As we've said, accomplished yogis can 
regulate basic physiological functions through inner 
techniques that focus attention and intention. You can 
learn to slow your heartbeat, raise your body temperature, and influence your circulation. Try this simple 
attention and intention meditation to convince yourself 
that your mind and body are intimately linked. 

1. Sit comfortably, close your eyes, and take a slow, 
deep breath. Slowly exhale, releasing any tension you 
may be holding in your body. For the next few minutes, practice the So Hum meditation described earlier 
or Primordial Sound Meditation if you have been 
instructed in it. 

2. Now bring your attention into the area of your 
heart. For a few moments, simply feel the sensations 
you are carrying in your heart and then for a few minutes consider all the things for which you are grateful. 
Acknowledge everything in your life for which you 
feel gratitude  -  the people, the love, the experiences, 
and the opportunities that make you the person you 
are. 



go The Seven Spiritual Laws of Yoga 

3. Now take a few moments to relinquish any grievances, regrets, or hostility you may be holding inside 
you. Simply have the intention to release all toxic 
feelings that are not nourishing to your heart. 

4. Next, silently, like a mantra, repeat the expression, 
Thy will be done . . . Thy will be done . . . Thy will be 
done. Have the intention to surrender to whatever 
you imagine or believe is the underlying intelligence 
of the universe, be it God, Nature, Cosmic Order, or 
any other concept that you have. 

5. Now, with your attention in your chest, see if you 
can perceive the throbbing of your heartbeat, as 
either a sensation or a subtle vibration. Introduce the 
intention for your heartbeat to slow down . . . slow 
down . . . slow down. 

6. Shift your attention to your hands and become 
aware of your heartbeat in your hands. Have the 
intention to increase the blood flow and warmth to 
your hands. 

7. Now direct your attention to any part of your 
body that you believe needs healing and feel your 
heart throbbing slowly in that area. If there is no 
place in your body that needs attention, simply be 
aware of your heart throbbing in your chest. Silently, 
like a mantra, repeat the phrase, Healing and transformation . . . Healing and transformation . . . Healing and 
transformation. 

8. After a few minutes, bring your attention to your 
breath, simply observing the inflow and outflow of 
your breathing. When you are ready, slowly open 
your eyes. 



The Yoga of Meditation 



The Upanishads tell us, "As great as the infinite space 
beyond is the space within the lotus of the heart." From 
the time of your birth, you have been called to explore the 
world outside of you. Meditation is the exploration of 
your inner world. Yoga encourages you to be as familiar 
with your inner world of thoughts, feelings, memories, 
desires, and imagination as you are with the outer world of 
time, space, and causality. When you can move through 
both the inner and outer domains of life with freedom and 
finesse, you fulfill the highest purpose of yoga. 




Moving Energy 

Pranayama and Bandhas 

Y 



Why do you stay in prison when the door is so wide 
open? 

 -  Rumi 



Breath is the essence of life. You inhale for the first time 
shortly after arriving in the world even before your 
umbilical cord is cut. From that moment on you take 
approximately seventeen thousand breaths each day, 
which over a lifetime totals about 500 million breaths. In 
your final moments on this planet, you exhale for the last 
time; that breath defines the end of your life. Your 
breathing supports every experience you have from the 
time of your first inhalation to that of your last exhalation. 
Breath is life. 

In yoga, the breath is intimately associated with 
prana, which translates from Sanskrit into English as 




IOO The Seven Spiritual Laws of Yoga 

"primordial impulse." Prana is the primordial life force 
that governs all your mental and physical functions. It is 
the vital energy that animates inert molecules into selfhealing, evolving biological beings. It is the primary creative power of the cosmos. 

Learning to regulate your prana to calm, balance, 
cleanse, and invigorate your body/mind is a powerful 
technique of yoga. Your breath integrates many layers of 
your life  -  your environment, your respiratory tract, your 
nervous system, your mind, and every cell in your body. 

Regulating your breath enhances your physical, emotional, and spiritual well-being. It is the key to a healthy, 
vibrant life. 

For most people, breathing is the only autonomic 
nervous system function that they can influence. Modern 
physiology divides the nervous system into two main 
components  -  the voluntary nervous system and the 
autonomic nervous system. The voluntary nervous system is active when you clap your hands, wave your arms, 
or use your legs to walk. It is responsible for activating the 
muscles that form the hundreds of facial expressions you 
make in a day, as well as those that control your speech. 
Although many of these functions occur with only minimally conscious intention, you have the ability to initiate 
and stop the use of these muscle groups at will. 

The autonomic nervous system governs basic bodily 
functions, which you usually have no conscious ability to 
influence. These include core physiological functions 
such as heart rate, blood pressure, regulation of your temperature, the levels of hormones in your body, perspiration, and the movement of food through your digestive 
tract. Your autonomic nervous system also plays an 



Moving Energy IOI 

important role in the regulation of your immune system. 
Modern neurological science suggests that most people 
are incapable of directly affecting these core physiological 
processes. They function on their own whether or not 
you are paying attention to them or attempting to alter 
them. Most people do not know how to influence their 
blood pressure, change the flow of their blood, reduce 
their sweating, or affect their digestive function. 

Studies of yoga practitioners, however, have found 
that with practice, people can learn to consciously 
decrease their blood pressure, slow their heart rate, 
reduce their oxygen consumption, alter their circulation, 
and lower their stress hormone levels. Learning to influence these usually automatic functions is a different set of 
skills from those we use to ride a bicycle or kick a soccer 
ball, but it is one that you can master with a little practice. 
Learning to regulate your breath is the first step in discovering how to influence other essential involuntary 
bodily functions. 

Left on its own, breathing does not require your conscious attention to consume oxygen or eliminate carbon 
dioxide. This is a good thing. Day and night, respiratory 
centers deep in your brain stem monitor the level of gases 
in your body and automatically adjust your breathing rate 
and depth. As anyone with asthma can testify, having to 
pay attention to breathing in order to get enough lifesustaining oxygen into your body is not desirable. 

Every human being is capable of temporarily overriding 
autonomic control over breathing by speeding up, slowing 
down, or holding the breath. Conscious alteration of the 
usually automatic breathing process has powerful effects on 
your mind and body and provides a window into your 

ability to influence other autonomic functions. While 
you have your attention on your breath, you can modify it, 
but as soon as you relinquish conscious control, your 
involuntary nervous system resumes its authority. 

Through the yogic practice of breathing exercises, 
known as pranayama, you can use your breath to influence 
your physical and mental states. A variety of techniques to 
relax or invigorate your body/mind are described in yoga. 
They are easily mastered and have prompt and powerful 
effects. 

Pranayama Breathing Exercises 

You can learn a lot about life by paying attention to your 
breathing. Right now, take a deep breath in and hold it. 
Feel the increasing discomfort that builds as you resist 
the natural impulse to let go. When it becomes too 
uncomfortable, release your breath and notice the immediate relief that you feel. Holding on to anything when it 
is time to let go creates distress in your body and mind. 
Now take a breath, fully empty your lungs, and hold your 
breath. Become aware of the increasing discomfort that 
develops when you resist something from entering your 
life that you are meant to accept. Notice the relief that 
you feel as you take your next breath. 

Ingesting, absorbing, releasing, and eliminating  -  
these are the key components of a healthy life and of natural, balanced breathing. When these basic functions are 
working well, you are able to absorb what you need and 
eliminate what you don't, resulting in life-sustaining 
nourishment and detoxification. When you take a bite of 
an apple, for example, you ingest potential nourishment, 

but the energy and information contained within the 
food do not become available to you until you've 
absorbed the basic nutrients through your small intestines. In every substance you ingest there are components that do not serve you, so a healthy digestive system 
releases the nonnourishing remains of the food into your 
colon. It is necessary to eliminate the residues of digestion 
on a regular basis for you to remain healthy. 

These same steps are applicable on an emotional 
level. When people engage in emotionally powerful relationships, they often ingest more emotional energy and 
information than they are capable of digesting. To maintain a healthy emotional life, we must all selectively 
absorb those aspects of the emotional experience that are 
nourishing, while releasing and eliminating those components that, if retained, could be toxic. 

The Law of Giving and Receiving is in continuous play 
during the practice of pranayama breathing exercises. 
Conscious breathing means focusing your attention on 
the perpetual exchange that is taking place between your 
personal body and the extended body of your environment. You exchange ten billion trillion atoms with your 
surroundings with every breath you take. The atoms you 
inhale every day have traversed the bodies of living 
beings across the universe and across time. Within you 
right now, you have carbon atoms that once inhabited the 
body of a cheetah in Africa, a dolphin in the South 
Pacific, a palm tree in Tahiti, or an Australian Aborigine. 
Ultimately, every particle in your body was Stardust, created at the dawn of the universe. Your breathing is a continuous testimony to the Law of Giving and Receiving. 

Conscious breathwork is also an expression of the 
Law of Least Effort and the Law of Dharma. In a healthy 
body, breathing is an effortless process, automatically 
speeding up or slowing down, becoming deeper or shallower with the subtlest shift in your body's requirements 
for energy. The oxygen you inhale supports the purpose 
(dharma) of every cell in your body, enabling each to 
exercise its unique talent while serving the wholeness of 
the physiology. 

On both physical and emotional levels, pranayama 
breathing exercises clear the channels that enable you to 
effortlessly exchange your personal energy with the 
energy of the universe. Consciously directed, your vital 
energy can be used for creativity and healing. Pranayama 
breathing exercises are tools to help you channel your 
vital force in evolutionary ways that bring you higher 
levels of physical and emotional well being. 

Bhastrika  -  Bellows Breath 

When you have a lot of energy moving through your 
body, you naturally breathe more vigorously. You spontaneously move more air when you are exercising or dancing 
because your body requires a greater quantity of oxygen to 
supply your energy needs. In the same way that invigorating action increases the depth of your breathing, you can 
consciously deepen your breathing, resulting in greater 
energy available to your body. 

One of the most empowering breathing exercises in 
yoga is known as Bhastrika, which translated into English 
means "bellows breath." This is an energizing and cleansing breath. Although it is generally a very safe technique, 



Moving Energy 






it is important that you stay tuned in to your body during 
this process. If at any time you experience uncomfortable 
sensations or feel light-headed during the process, discontinue the Bhastrika for a few moments, then resume 
the exercise in a less intense manner. 

Begin by relaxing your shoulders and practicing slow, 
deep abdominal breathing. After a few deep breaths, fully 
exhale, and then begin forceful complete exhalations followed by forceful deep inhalations through your nose at 
the rate of one second per cycle. The entire breathing 
movement should be from your diaphragm. Keep your 
head, neck, shoulders, and chest relatively stable while 
your belly moves in and out. 




The Seven Spiritual Laws of Yoga 



Start with a round of ten Bhastrika breaths, then 
resume normal breathing and simply observe the sensations in your body. After about fifteen to thirty seconds, 
begin the next round with twenty breaths. If you feel 
light-headed or experience tingling in your fingers or 
around your mouth, discontinue your deep breathing and 
simply observe your normal quiet breathing until the 
sensations completely subside, then resume the process. 

After a pause of thirty seconds, perform a third round 
of thirty breaths. Again, suspend your Bhastrika breathing 
if you feel woozy. After the third round, simply witness the 
sensations in your body. For most people, this breathing 
exercise creates the experience of feeling energized and 
invigorated. 

If you feel sluggish in the morning, perform a set of 
Bhastrika breaths and you will feel the clouds clear from 
your body and mind. You can also perform a couple minutes of Bhastrika during the day if you are feeling drowsy 
or lethargic. If you are trying to lose weight, performing 
Bhastrika several times per day will increase your digestive 
power and help your metabolism burn more intensely. It is 
generally not recommended that you perform Bhastrika 
pranayama close to bedtime as you may have difficulty 
falling asleep. Although Bhastrika clears the mind, it 
enlivens energy. 

Kapalabhati  -  Shining Breath 

A variation of the bellows breath is Kapalabhati, which 
involves forceful exhalations followed by passive inhalations. Sitting comfortably with your spine in an upright 
posture, forcefully expel all the air from your lungs, then 
allow them to fill passively. The primary movement is 
from your diaphragm. Perform this movement ten times, 
then allow your breathing to return to normal and 
observe the sensations in your body. Repeat these cycles of 
ten movements three to four times. Like Bhastrika, 
Kapalabhati is a cleansing and invigorating pranayama. 

Dirgha  -  Complete Breath 

Dirgha pranayama is a cleansing and balancing breathing 
exercise that shows prompt benefits. It involves consciously filling three different areas of your lungs. You 
start in the lower chambers, move up through the middle 
thoracic regions, and finish with the upper spaces. This 
breathing technique is a simple expression of the Law of 



IOo The Seven Spiritual Laws of Yoga 

Intention and Desire. Simply by shifting your intention as 
to where to direct your breath you will notice a deeply 
relaxing and releasing effect. 

Perform Dirgha pranayama either sitting upright or 
lying flat on your back. Both the inhalations and exhalations are through your nostrils. 

For the first breath, inhale slowly and deeply, directing 
the air into your lower lungs by consciously using your 
diaphragm. When this is performed properly, your belly 
should inflate so you look like you are a little pregnant. As 
you exhale, deflate your belly, as if air were escaping from 
a balloon. Repeat this pattern several times, drawing the 
air into your lungs' lower chambers, maintaining smooth 
and rhythmic breathing. 

After you are comfortable with this first step, begin 
bringing air into the middle section of your lungs. Start by 
filling your lower regions as before, then direct your 
inflow to your mid-lung region by opening your rib cage. 
You will feel your ribs expanding between your diaphragm 
and your chest. Inhale and exhale several times, filling 
both the bottom and middle areas of your lungs. 

Finally, draw air into the bottom and middle regions of 
your lungs, then continue filling your upper lungs by 
breathing into your collarbones (clavicle). Practice the 
complete breath so your inhalation and exhalations flow 
in a smooth, continuous motion, sequentially directing 
your attention from your diaphragm to your ribs to your 
clavicle. Envision this deep, conscious breathing nourishing the organs, tissues, and cells in your body, enabling 
them to perform their vital functions effortlessly and in 
accordance with their dharma. 



Ujjayi  -  Success Breath 



The pranayama technique known as Ujjayi can help settle 
your mind and body when you are feeling irritated, frustrated, or overheated. Although the origins of the word 
are unclear, one interpretation is "leading to success." 
This breath allows you to stay focused without generating 
unnecessary mental friction. Ujjayi creates a cooling 
influence at the back of the throat and has a balancing 
effect on the cardiorespiratory system. 

To perform Ujjayi breath, take a slightly deeper than 
normal inhalation. On the exhalation, slightly constrict 
your throat muscles so as you breathe out it sounds as 
if you are snoring. The outflow of your breath is through 
your nose with your mouth closed. The result should be 
that you sound like Darth Vader from Star Wars. 

Another way to get the hang of this practice is to first 
exhale the sound "haaah" with your mouth open. Now 
make a similar sound with your mouth closed, directing 
the outflow of air through your nasal passages. This 
should result in the desired breathy snoring sound. Once 
you have mastered it on the outflow, perform the same 
procedure on inflow, gently constricting your throat as 
you inhale. 

Try shifting into Ujjayi breath whenever you find 
yourself becoming aggravated or upset, and you will 
notice a prompt soothing influence. Ujjayi is said to have 
a calming effect on the body while it helps the mind to 
focus. We recommend using Ujjayi while performing 
your yoga poses to help you stay focused as you move 
from one posture to the next. 

Ujjayi can also be a useful tool during aerobic exercise. 



no 



The Seven Spiritual Laws of Yoga 




Olympic-level athletes have introduced Ujjayi into their 
training routines to enhance respiratory efficiency. Try 
using Ujjayi while performing your cardiovascular workout and see if practicing this breath technique reduces 
wear and tear on your body. 



Nadi Shodhana  -  Channel Clearing Breath 

Nadi Shodhana means "clearing the channels of circulation" and is sometimes known descriptively as alternate 
nostril breathing. This pranayama exercise has a quieting 
effect and is very helpful in reducing mental turbulence 
associated with anxiety and insomnia. In Nadi Shodhana, you use your right hand to control the flow of 
breath through your nostrils. Your thumb is positioned 
over the right nostril, while your third and fourth fingers 
are over the left. 



Moving Energy III 

There are several different styles of Nadi Shodhana, 
all of which regulate the flow of air through your nasal passages. They differ according to how and when you alter 
the breathing pattern. The simplest procedure involves 
closing off alternate nostrils at the end of each inhalation. 
Inhale deeply, then close off the right nostril with your 
thumb, exhaling through the left. Smoothly inhale 
through the left nostril, and at the peak of the inflow, 
close off your left nostril with the third and fourth fingers 
of your right hand, exhaling through the right nostril. 
After full exhalation, inhale through the right nostril, 
again closing it off with your thumb at the peak of 
inhalation. Your breathing should be effortless with your 
mind simply witnessing the process. 

Continue performing Nadi Shodhana for the next 
few breaths, following this pattern: Inhaling through the 







The Seven Spiritual Laws of Yoga 




left nostril. Exhaling through the right. Inhaling through 
the right nostril. Exhaling through the left. 

Nadi Shodhana has a relaxing effect on your mind 
and body. It can be useful to quiet your mind prior to 
beginning mantra meditation or when your mind is racing 
when you are trying to fall asleep. By softening the 
breath through Nadi Shodhana, you invoke a state of 
calm inner awareness. 



Breathwork in Action 

Become aware of your breathing throughout the day. If 
you find yourself in a tense or stressful situation, consciously take some slow, deep abdominal breaths through 
your nose and notice how your entire body relaxes. Practice Ujjayi breathing when you are walking or exercising 

and notice how it brings you back to your center. Use the 
Dirgha breath when you are feeling pressure and strain to 
circulate the life force throughout your body. Be conscious of your breath, and your awareness will stay centered in the midst of turbulence. According to yoga, this 
is the true value of pranayama. 

The Bandhas  -  Embracing Your 
Vital Energy 

The word bandha means "to hold, lock, or embrace." 
These potent practices train you to direct your prana, or 
vital energy, to different centers of your body. Bandhas 
provide direct demonstration of the Law of Dharma as you 
witness the immediate reactions in your body to specific 
actions you take. 

The basic principle with each bandha is first to 
accumulate energy in an area of your physiology, then 
release it. This process of building a force and then 
unleashing it discharges obstacles from the pathways of 
energy circulation. Like Traditional Chinese Medicine, 
yoga envisions the body/mind as a network of energetic 
channels through which life force flows. These pathways 
are known as srotas and nadis. Srotas are circulatory 
channels in the physical body, whereas nadis exist in the 
subtle body. Health and vitality are dependent upon life 
energy flowing freely through the physical and subtle 
biological passageways. 

Jalandhara Bandha  -  Chin Lock 

Sitting comfortably with your legs crossed in front of you, 
take a deep breath. While exhaling, bring your chin to 



The Seven Spiritual Laws of Yoga 




your chest. Pressing your chin into your chest, inhale 
against your closed throat so that no air moves but your 
chest rises up. Hold this position for ten seconds, then 
raise your chin and inhale normally. 

The word jalandhara comes from two roots  -  jala, 
meaning "network," and dhara, meaning "upward flow." 
Jalandhara is designed to stimulate the network of nerves 
and energy channels in the throat. Energy stagnation in 
this region is associated with chronic neck pain, hoarseness, and thyroid imbalances. Jalandhara traditionally 
has been used to strengthen the thyroid, relieve neck 
stiffness, and enhance mental clarity. 



Uddiyana Bandha  -  Stomach Lift 

Sit comfortably with your legs crossed and your spine 
upright. Bend slightly forward. Placing your hands by 



Moving Energy 






your sides or on your thighs, bend slightly forward. Take in 
a deep breath and completely exhale, emptying your 
lungs as fully as possible. Make a motion as if you were 
about to take another inhalation, but instead lift your 
abdomen so that you are forming a hollow below your 
diaphragm. Hold this position for about ten seconds, then 
release and take a normal in-breath. Repeat this motion 
seven times. 

This bandha activates the solar plexus energy center, 
which governs digestion and the ability to translate your 
desires into manifestations. Blockages in this region are 
associated with digestive disturbances and metabolic 
imbalances. Developing the ability to regulate energy in 
this area of your body ensures that you have access to 
your core digestive fire. When your fire is burning 




IIO The Seven Spiritual Laws of Yoga 

brightly, you are able to extract the nourishment you 
need from your environment and discharge toxins that 
inhibit the flow or energy in your body/mind. 

Moola Bandha  -  Root Lock 

Sitting with your legs crossed, bring your right heel as 
close to your groin as you can. With your eyes closed, 
begin contracting your anal sphincter muscles. Imagine as 
you are contracting that you are drawing your rectum 
upward into your abdomen. Hold this position for ten 
seconds, then slowly release while you exhale. Repeat 
this process ten times. 

Moola means "root." The root chakra is the source of 
all energy in the body. Learning to regulate prana in this 
region will enable you to consciously direct your creative 
forces to the achievement of all your desires. Performing 
this bandha can help with a wide range of health conditions including hemorrhoids, urinary incontinence, and 
sexual function problems. 

Pranayama exercises and bandhas bring your attention 
into your body and use your intention to move energy 
consciously. All success in life derives from this ability to 
consciously acquire, store, and release energy. 

Learning to harness the power of your intention is 
the essence of the Law of Intention and Desire. The ability to direct your prana  -  your life energy  -  to eliminate 
toxicity from your body enables you to do less and 
accomplish more. 

Not wasting your energy resisting the flow of your life 
force is the essence of the Law of Least Effort. Conscious 

breath work through pranayama and conscious energy 
management though bandhas teach you fundamental 
skills in governing the vital energy in your body. Pranayama breathing exercises and energy-regulating bandhas 
are fundamental practices that teach you how to manage 
your life energy efficiently and effectively. 

The practice of yoga is practice for life. Learning 
these fundamental skills will serve you in all aspects of 
your life. 



Y 



Part III 



Yoga Practice 






Consciousness in 
Motion 

Yoga Asanas 

Y 



Your body is precious . It is your vehicle for awakening. Treat it with care. 

 -  Siddhartha Gautama 



As you are reading these words, bring your attention 
into your body. Without moving, notice your posture. How are you sitting? Are your legs crossed? Are you 
in a comfortable position? Is there a part of you that is 
straining? Now make any adjustments in your position to 
enhance your comfort level. This is yoga. Changing your 
posture as a result of bringing your awareness into your 
body is the practice of yoga. The feedback loop is completed as changing your posture results in a spontaneous 
shift in your awareness. 


Yoga is good for your mind and good for your body. Of 
the three important components of a balanced fitness program  -  flexibility, strength, and cardiovascular conditioning  -  yoga directly provides the first two and has the 
potential to enhance the third. Scientific studies on the 
health benefits of yoga have found that it can be useful in a 
wide range of conditions, including hypertension, asthma, 
depression, arthritis, heart disease, epilepsy, and cancer. 

In the Seven Spiritual Laws of Yoga program, we have 
chosen postures to expand your flexibility, strengthen 
your muscles, and improve your balance. Each of the 
Seven Spiritual Laws enlivens the practice of yoga, while 
the practice of yoga enlivens your awareness of the Seven 
Spiritual Laws. Whether you are a beginning or an experienced yoga practitioner, this program will energize your 
body while taking your mind to a more expanded state of 
awareness. 

Body Awareness Poses 

We'll begin with postures that have the main purpose of 
enlivening body awareness. The word for "position" in 
yoga is asana, which means "seat." An asana is a position 
that you assume consciously. Yoga is the practice of consciously choosing the seat you assume. Although on one 
level, this means the physical position you place your 
body in, on another level, it implies that ultimately you 
choose every position in life in which you find yourself. 
Yoga then becomes a practice for making your choices 
more consciously so that the consequences of them are 
success and happiness. 

As a human being, you have a built-in mechanism to 

evaluate the choices you make in your life, which is by listening to the signals of comfort or discomfort that your 
body generates as you consider your options. This is the 
essence of the Law of Karma, which utilizes body awareness to make karmically correct choices. Learning to 
trust the feedback your body provides will enhance your 
ability to make karmically correct choices in life. 

There are two important benefits of practicing yoga 
poses that enhance mind-body integration. The first is 
that yoga postures enable you to be more aware of the signals your body is sending so you can interpret them accurately. It is easy for human beings to be so immersed in 
their minds that they lose awareness of their bodies. The 
body is sending signals of what it needs, but the mind is 
too preoccupied to notice the signs. The practice of yoga 
enables you to reduce the mental background noise so 
you can pay attention to the messages of your body. 

The second benefit of yoga is that regular practice of 
these poses will enhance your general level of physical and 
emotional comfort. If the background state of your body is 
one of chronic discomfort, it cannot be a reliable instrument by which you evaluate your choices. When using 
your body as an instrument for making choices, the subtle 
sensations of comfort or discomfort provide the guidance 
for right action. If your baseline state is disturbed, you will 
not be able to notice the shifts your body takes when 
considering different choices. Helping your body release 
obstacles that impede the healthy flow of life energy is a 
great benefit of practicing yoga postures. 

Practitioners at all levels can perform these body 
awareness poses. It is important to remember that yoga is 
not a competitive sport. The goal of yoga is to enhance 






The Seven Spiritual Laws of Yoga 



the connection between your body, mind, and spirit. The 
precise performance of a posture is of secondary importance to mind-body integration. Stay fully present as you 
move through these postures, gently moving into and 
then through your body's resistance. 

Pavanamuktasana  -  Wind Relieving Pose 

Begin by lying on your back, allowing your awareness to 
float through your body. If you notice any area of tension 
in this resting pose, have the intention to release it. Now 
take in a deep breath and bring your right knee up to 
your chest. Grasp your leg below the knee with both 
hands and gently bring your chin to your knee. Hold this 
position for a few moments, breathing easily and feeling 
the sensations in your body. After several breaths, slowly 
straighten your leg, exhaling as you return it to the floor. 



; 



Repeat the pose with your left knee, bending it to 
your chest as you inhale, while raising your chin to your 
knee. Again, breathe easily for a few moments, then 
slowly lower your head and leg to the floor while exhaling. 




Now, while inhaling, lift both knees up to your chest, 
grasping both of your legs with your coupled hands. Hold 
for several moments, easily inhaling and exhaling and 
being aware of the sensations in your spine. 




Now, holding both of your legs below the knees, gently rock backward and forward three or four times, then 
gently rock side to side several times. 



I20 The Seven Spiritual Laws of Yc 





Returning to your back, gently begin bicycling 
motions with your legs. Placing your hands by your sides, 
extend first one leg, then the other. Inhale and exhale in 
rhythm with each leg extension. After about half a 
minute, return both legs to the floor. 








These are useful starting poses, for they begin mobilizing energy in the body. According to Ayurveda, yoga's sister branch of Vedic science, the vital airs of the body, 
known collectively as vayu, are the basis of all movement. 
Vayu governs the movement of thought, the movement of 
air, the movement of muscles, the movement of blood, 
and the movement of elimination. On a cellular level, it 
regulates the movement of DNA molecules, the movement of proteins, and the movement of hormones. Health 
results when vayu is moving harmoniously. 

Vayu has a natural lightness, which naturally impels it 
to move in an upward direction. When vayu is disrupted 
as a result of stressful experiences, its job of eliminating 
toxins down and out from the body is impaired. Impairment in the elimination function of vayu results in 
energy stagnation, and the accumulation of subtle toxicity in the body. These wind relieving poses bring vayu 
back to its appropriate home in the pelvis so it can perform its essential duty of moving toxins down and out of 
the body. 

Sarvangasana  -  Shoulder Stand 

While still on the floor, with your hands alongside your 
body, slowly raise your legs so they are perpendicular to the 
floor. Gently roll your weight onto your upper back as you 



I2o The Seven Spiritual Laws of Yoga 

elevate your hips, supporting them with both of your 
hands. Keep your upper arms and elbows on the floor. The 
back of your head and neck remain flat on the floor. Find 
a point of comfortable balance into which you can relax. 
Inhale and exhale slowly and deeply in this position. 







Halasana  -  Plow Pose 

From the shoulder stand, gently lower your legs over 
and behind your head so you are touching the floor with 
your toes. If you cannot bring them all the way to the 
floor, lower them as far as you can. Place your arms alongside you, breathing easily, and feel the stretch in your 
spine and thighs. Bring your attention to your breathing 
and practice Ujjayi pranayama in this pose, audibly 
inhaling and exhaling with slightly constricted throat 
muscles. 




Slowly alternate between the shoulder stand and the 
plow pose three or four times. These two poses are beneficial for massaging the visceral organs and toning the 
thyroid gland. 

Now slowly lower both legs back to the floor, resting 
comfortably on your back. Witness your breath while 
feeling the sensations in your body. 

The shoulder stand and plow poses circulate energy up 
and down your spine. When you first try the shoulder 
pose, you may find that your center of gravity is in your 
hips and buttocks and you may have difficulty maintaining 
your legs over your head. With repeated practice, you 
will feel increasing comfort bringing your legs over your 
head and maintaining your balance with little effort. You 
may initially have difficulty flexing enough for your toes to 
touch the floor. After a few rounds of doing the shoulder 
stand alternating with the plow, it will be easier for you to 
obtain full benefit from both poses. 

Bhujangasana  -  Cobra Pose 

Roll from your back onto your stomach. Bring your legs and 
feet together with your toes slightly pointed. Place your 



The Seven Spiritual Laws of Yoga 



palms beneath your shoulders, and while inhaling, gently 
begin raising your eyes, then your head, then your chest 
upward off the floor. As much as possible, use your spinal 
muscles rather than your arms to lift yourself up. Your 
lower abdomen should remain on the floor. Inhale as you 
rise and exhale as you lower yourself back down. Repeat 
this several times, then lower your chest to the floor. 






Salabhasana  -  Locust Pose 

From your stomach roll onto your side. Make two fists side 
by side below your groin with your arms straight. Now roll 
back onto your stomach with your arms beneath your 
chest and abdomen. As you inhale, lift your right leg off 
the floor. Hold it for a few moments, then lower it while 
exhaling. Repeat this motion with your left leg. If you are 
able to perform this fairly easily, try raising both legs off 
the floor together, keeping your knees together. Inhale 
while you are lifting, hold for several moments, then 
lower both legs to the floor. 



Consciousness in Motion 







Dhanurasana  -  Bow Pose 

Lying on your chest and abdomen with your forehead on the 
floor, tune in to your body, breathing easily. Now, slowly and 
deeply inhaling, reach behind you and grasp both ankles 
with your hands. Raise your head and chest off the floor 
while pulling your ankles up and toward your head. Lift 
your knees and thighs off the floor and look upward. Hold 
this position for several deep breaths, then gradually lower 
your legs and chest to the floor as you exhale. 


These three postures  -  cobra, locust, and bow  -  
extend your spine to increase backward strength and 
flexibility. Modern life has a tendency to constrict the 
spine with prolonged sitting at work and while traveling 
in your car or in an airplane. As a result of this habit of 
constriction, breathing becomes shallower and subtle 
anxiety is experienced. Consciously extending the spine 
counterbalances the restriction born of repeated flexion 
and has a noticeable effect on both physical and emotional well-being. 

These postures have a direct effect on improving 
spinal health. Our spines consist of bony spinal vertebrae 
separated by shock-absorbing disks. When you perform a 
posture that extends the spine, the pressure is placed on the 
back part of the vertebral body, which has the effect 
of pushing the disks forward into their normal and 
healthy position. The muscles that run along the spine are 
strengthened through these poses, so that less weight is 
borne directly by the disks. For people troubled by chronic 
back pain due to bulging vertebral disks, the cobra, locust, 
and bow poses help normalize the anatomy and reduce 
back discomfort. 



Janu Sirsasana  -  Bent Knee Forward Bend 

Rolling to your back, assume an upright sitting position 
with your legs out in front of you. Now, bend your right 
knee and pull your foot tightly into your groin. Raising 
both hands over your head, exhale while slowly flexing 
forward at the waist, reaching forward to grasp your left 
ankle or foot. If you cannot bend forward far enough to 
reach your foot, hold your leg as far down as you can 



Consciousness in Motion 






without straining. In this position, use your breath to 
consciously release further into the pose, having the 
intention to relax with each exhalation. Hold this position, breathing deeply for several moments, then slowly 
release. 




Repeat the pose with your left knee bent, flexing forward to grasp your right ankle or foot. Again, find your 
point of resistance, then introduce the intention to surrender, using your breath to release more deeply into the pose. 
Listen to the information your body is sending to you. 




This posture provides a stretch to the hamstring muscles at the back of the leg. Opening these muscles through 
this pose translates into a more fluid gait. 

Padmasana  -  Lotus Mudra 

Cross both legs in front of you, with your right ankle resting on your left thigh. If you can, bring your left ankle 
onto your right thigh, assuming a full lotus position. If you 
do not yet have the flexibility in your hips and legs to 
achieve a full lotus, remain in a half-lotus with your left 
ankle beneath your right thigh. 

Now, flex forward at the waist until you are resting 
your lower abdomen on your thighs. Relax into this pose for 
several slow, deep breaths. Grasp your hands together 
behind you and slowly lift your arms upward, keeping 
them straight. Hold this position for ten seconds, breathing 
deeply, then lower your arms and slowly return to a sitting 
position. 





The classic lotus pose opens the pelvis and hips. Flexing forward in lotus increases the stretch in your hips and 
groin. Try switching the leg that is on top and notice how 
you are able to flex forward more easily each time. 

Uttpluthi  -  Uplifting Pose 

Continue sitting with your legs crossed in full or halflotus. Place your hands flat on the floor on both sides of 
your thighs. Lift your entire body of the floor and hold for 
ten seconds. Then gently lower yourself to the floor. 

This posture requires some upper body strength. At 
first, you may have difficulty raising your entire body. If so, 
allow your knees to remain on the floor while you raise 
your buttocks. Maintaining an upright pose, practice 
shifting your center point until you feel stable. If you 
practice the uplifting pose daily, you will begin lifting 
your entire body off the floor within two weeks. Remember 

that the primary purpose of this pose is to bring your 
attention inward, enhancing the communication between 
the mind and the body. 



Balancing Poses 

A healthy life is a life in balance. Yoga practice offers an 
opportunity for learning about dynamic balance. Maintaining mind-body balance provides the best platform to 
make karmically correct choices, enabling you to perform 
actions in the most efficient way. A life in balance is a life 
in dharma, for every action supports the evolutionary 
flow of life in which minimal resistance and maximum 
success are generated. 

A balanced mind recognizes that we have control 
over the choices we make but not over the consequences 
of the choices. Putting your attention on the action 
rather than focusing on the fruits of action is the key to 
successful living. Yoga offers the opportunity to develop a 
balanced mind by bringing your attention into a pose 
while relinquishing your attachment to the outcome. 
Bringing balance into your body will awaken balance in 
your mind, just as bringing your mind into balance will 
assist you in finding physical balance. 

The next set of postures is designed to awaken balance 
in your body and mind. Learning to maintain stillness in 
your body will help you cultivate stillness in your mind. 
At first, these balancing poses may be challenging for 
you, but if you practice them regularly, you will find them 
becoming easier each day, until you have mastered them. 
Notice how achieving stillness in your body spontaneously supports mental stillness. 

Vrksasana  -  Tree Pose 

Practicing this pose will help you develop the stability of a 
tree. Stand with your feet together and your arms resting 



The Seven Spiritual Laws of Yoga 



comfortably by your sides. Close your eyes and become 
aware of your body's natural self-balancing movements. 
These subtle shifts in the activation of different muscle 
groups to keep you from falling are being orchestrated by an 
elaborate neuromuscular system. Balance centers in your 
inner ear and brain are continuously communicating with 
your postural muscles, helping you overcome the gravitational force that is trying to bring you down to the ground. 
Feel the Law of Least Effort and the Law of Dharma at 
work within you as you witness the perpetual adjustments 
that are occurring without your conscious input. 

Now open your eyes and bend your right knee, bringing the sole of your right foot as high as possible onto your 
left thigh. Hold this position until you feel steady, then, 


while balancing on your left leg, raise your arms over 
your head until your palms are together. Look straight 
ahead, breathing easily, and hold the pose until you 
barely require any adjustment to maintain your balance. 

Lower your right leg to the floor, close your eyes, and 
again bring your attention in to your body, tuning in to 
your sense of balance and noticing any subtle changes 
that may have occurred as a result of holding the tree 
pose. Now, bring the sole of your left foot onto the inner 
aspect of your right thigh as high as possible, balancing on 
your right leg. Maintain stillness for about ten seconds, 
then return your left leg to the floor. 

Practice the tree pose whenever your mind is turbulent. You will notice that as you bring your attention into 
the present moment, your body becomes still and your 
mind quiets. 

Ekpadasana  -  One Foot Posture 

Standing with your feet together, extend both arms in 
front of you so your palms are facing downward with your 
index fingers together. Balancing on your right leg, partially bend your left knee, bringing your left leg in front of 
you. Find your point of stillness while maintaining balance 
on your right leg. 

Once you feel stable, slowly bring your left leg behind 
you while flexing at the waist until your left leg is 
extended out parallel to the floor. While you balance on 
your right leg, your arms remain in front of you with your 
palms facing the floor. Bring your attention to your 
breath as you find your center point of stillness. 

Hold this pose for about ten seconds, then slowly 
return your leg to the floor and resume standing with 






The Seven Spiritual Laws of Yoga 




your arms at your sides. Close your eyes for a few moments, 
checking in with your body. 

Repeat the posture with your left leg on the floor, first 
finding your balance with your right leg in front of you, 
then slowly bringing it behind you as you gently lean 
forward with your arms reaching forward. Slowly return to 
a standing position with both feet on the floor. 



There will be times when your one-pointed attention 
locks in to a pose and body and mind come together. 
This is the essence of yoga. You are in present-moment 
awareness and there is effortless communication between 
your body and your mind. 

Trikonasana  -  Triangle Pose 

From a standing pose, spread your legs apart so your feet 
are a little less than twice as wide as your shoulders. 
While inhaling, raise both arms straight up to shoulder 
height so they are parallel to the floor. 

Turn your left foot 90 degrees outward, and bending 
from the waist, slide your left arm down your left leg until 
you can grasp your ankle just above your foot. If you cannot reach this far, grab hold of your leg as far down as you 
can reach. Bring your right arm up so it is straight and 
pointing directly toward the ceiling. Look up toward your 
reaching hand. 

Hold this triangle posture, breathing deeply for five or 
six breaths, then gradually return to an upright position 
with your arms outstretched. Close your eyes and check in 
with your body for a few moments. 

Repeat the pose with the opposite arm and leg. Turn 
your right foot outward 90 degrees and then slide your 
right arm down your leg, grasping your ankle while your 
left arm is pointing straight up. Take several slow, deep 
breaths before returning to an upright position. 

The classical triangle pose enlivens both balance and 
flexibility. Use this pose to open your chest. Stretching 

while maintaining your balance is a great skill to develop 
in your yoga practice and in your life. 



Dandayamana Konasana  -  
Standing Angle Pose 

Standing with your legs apart and your arms outstretched 
at shoulder height parallel to the floor, slowly bend forward, grasping your ankles with your hands. If you cannot 
reach as far as your ankles, grasp your legs as close to your 
ankles as you can. Now gently pull your head down 
toward the floor while you press your hips upward. 

Hold this position for about ten seconds while slowly 
inhaling and exhaling, using your breath to surrender further into the pose. Slowly return to an upright position, 
take a few deep breaths, then repeat the standing angle 
pose two more times. Notice how each time you go into 
this posture it becomes easier to perform. 

Flexion into this pose is initiated from your hips. You 
will feel stretching in your groin and lower spine. If you 










cannot grasp your ankles, try resting your hands on the 
floor in front of you and gradually walk them back toward 
your feet. 

This pose allows you to see the world from a different 
angle, one of the benefits of yoga practice. Every person is 
a point of perspective, and it is easy for each of us to 
become attached to our particular point of view. Over 
time, this contributes to rigidity and judgment. Looking 
for opportunities to see the world from a new perspective 
nurtures flexibility in mind and body. 

Dandayamana Dhanurasana  -  
Standing Bow Pose 

Stand with your feet together with both arms straight in 
front of you, palms facing downward. Bending your left 
knee, reach behind you with your left hand and grasp 
your left ankle. Flexing forward at the waist, pull your left 
leg upward as far as you can comfortably stretch it, keeping your right hand forward and parallel to the floor. You 

should feel a stretch in your thigh muscles. If you cannot 
maintain your balance without holding on, grab onto the 
back of a chair with your hand until you find your center. 
Hold this pose for ten seconds, then release your left leg 
and allow it to return to the floor. 


Repeat the pose on the opposite side, starting with 
your feet together and hands outstretched. Then reach 
back, grasping your right ankle with your right hand 
while you keep your left arm outstretched in front, palm 
facing downward. Hold this balancing pose for about ten 
seconds, then slowly return to a standing position. 

The metaphor of the bow is used widely in yoga. To hit 
the target you are aiming at, you must first pull back to a 
still point that is full with potential. There is a classic 
Vedic story of an archery class in which Arjuna with his 
brothers and cousins are receiving instructions from the 
master archer, Drona. In a distant tree, Drona had placed 
a wooden bird onto which he had painted an artificial eye. 
He then asked each young man in succession to pull back 
an arrow but not release it until the student described 
what he was seeing. The first apprentice said that he saw 
the bird, the tree, the surrounding land, and the other students standing around him. Drona told him to put down 
the bow without launching the arrow. Each subsequent 
student responded similarly upon being asked the same 
question. When it was Arjuna's turn, his response was, 
"All I see is the eye of the bird." When asked by Drona, 
"Don't you see the bird, the trees, and the surrounding 
people?" Arjuna replied, "No, Guru, all I can see is the 
eye." At this response, Drona instructed him to release the 
arrow, which struck a bull's-eye. 

The technology for success in life is first to pull back to 
a still, quiet inner place from which you can become 
clear about your goal, and then act with the full power of 
your intention. In yoga, the bow poses remind you to 
dive deep within yourself to find your quiet, unbounded 



Consciousness in Motion 






state of awareness. When you act from this expanded 
domain of consciousness, your intentions will be powerful 
and success will be more likely. 

Garudasana  -  Eagle Pose 

Most people find the eagle pose challenging when they 
first try it, but it usually can be mastered within a short 
period of time. Standing with your feet together, bend 
both knees, then shift your weight to your left foot. Cross 
your right leg around the front of your left until you can 
hook your toes inside your left calf muscle. You will need 
to keep your left knee bent to achieve this. 

While your legs are wrapped and maintaining your 
balance, bend your right elbow and cross your left arm 
between your right arm and your chest. Place the fingers of 
your right hand onto the palm of your left hand and point 


your fingertips to the ceiling. Hold this twisted pose for 
ten seconds, then unwind. 

Repeat this balancing posture on the opposite side by 
shifting your weight to your right foot and wrapping your 
left leg around your right, hooking your left toes inside 
your right calf. This time, wind your right arm around 
your left so that the fingers of your left hand rest in your 
right palm. The opposite leg and arm are on top. 

In Vedic mythology, Garuda is the eagle god  -  half 
bird and half man. He is frequently shown carrying 
Vishnu, the god who maintains the universe. Garuda is 
known as the destroyer of obstacles to the fulfillment of 
desires. Develop the focused attention and balance 
required to master the eagle pose and obstacles will dissipate from your life. 

Practice these balancing poses on a regular basis and in 
addition to mastering the postures, you will find it easier to 
maintain your balance in all situations in your life. An 
underlying fundamental principle of yoga is the relationship between the individual and the cosmos, between the 
microcosm and the macrocosm. The skills gained during 
the practice of yoga translate into life skills. Everyone 
can benefit from greater balance in life. 

Yoga in Motion  -  
Salutations to the Sun 

The twelve poses of the sun salutations offer an opportunity to enhance flexibility and strength while improving 
circulatory health. The set of postures has been described 
as the most complete exercise available, so if you have 

only limited time for yoga, the sun salutations are your 
best choice. 

Through the twelve poses of the sun salutations, all 
major muscle groups and all major joints are exercised. 
These poses also massage and stimulate your major internal organs. These postures are designed to awaken the 
connection between your agni, or inner fire, and that of 
the sun. The word agni is the root of the English word 
ignite. When your agni is burning brightly, you are capable 
of digesting the energy and information you ingest on a 
daily basis, be it food, ideas, or emotional experiences. 
When your inner fire is weak and sputtering, you do not 
fully metabolize your daily life experiences. The residues of 
incomplete metabolism are stored in your body/mind, 
leading to fatigue and weakened immunity. When practiced along with following a healthy diet, a good daily 
routine, and the conscious avoidance of physical and 
emotional toxicity, the sun salutations are designed to 
kindle your inner fire so you can radiate the best of who 
you are. 

The poses of Surya Namaskar represent the full experience of human life with all its highs and lows and ins and 
outs. Traditionally performed at sunrise and sunset, the 
postures represent the metabolism of the sun's energy 
into life energy. The sun is the source of all life on this 
planet. Ultimately we are beings of light, and the sun 
salutations acknowledge this primordial connection. 

Performed slowly, the twelve poses encourage flexibility and strength. Performed rapidly, the sun salutes can 
provide a vigorous cardiovascular workout. 

Along with each posture of Surya Namaskar is a 
mantra that awakens an aspect of the energy of the sun. 

Say these sounds as you perform each pose and your mind 
will quiet and expand while you focus on the posture. Begin with your feet firmly planted on the ground in the 
salutation pose, inhaling and exhaling easily. Allow your 
attention to go inside and become aware of the current 
level of energy in your body. The mantra for the salutation 
pose acknowledges the unconditional life-giving power 
of the sun. This pose resonates with the heart chakra and 
the Law of Giving and Receiving. 







The mantra for the salutation pose is Om Mitraya 
Namaha. 



Consciousness in Motion 




With your buttock muscles tightened, begin stretching up 
toward the sky while inhaling into the sky reaching pose. 
Stretch upward through your back, chest, arms, and neck. 
The mantra for this pose acknowledges the darknessdispelling power of the sun. This pose awakens the throat 
chakra of expression and the Law of Detachment. 




The mantra for this pose is Om Ravaye Namaha. 

Next gently stretch forward while exhaling. Place your 
hands on the outsides of your feet, gently pressing your 






The Seven Spiritual Laws of Yoga 



head toward your knees. Bend your knees as much as you 
need to in the hand to feet pose. In this forward flexion, 
you balance the extension of the previous pose. The 
mantra for this pose acknowledges the continuous movement of the sun, which induces daily and seasonal 
rhythms. It is associated with the creativity chakra and the 
Law of Least Effort. 




The mantra for this pose is Om Suryaya Namaha. 

Now stretch back your right leg while looking upward, 
breathing easily in the equestrian pose. The mantra 
acknowledges the wisdom that dawns when light is 
brought onto a subject. It is associated with the chakra of 
intuition and the Law of Dharma. 



Consciousness in Motion 







The mantra for this pose is Om Bhanave Namaha. Next move into the mountain pose, with both legs 
straight and together, raising your buttocks into the air, 
stretching your arms. The mantra for this pose celebrates 
the unlimited power of the sun. It is associated with the 
throat chakra of expression and the Law of Detachment. 




The mantra for the mountain pose is Om Khagaya 
Namaha. 

6. ASTHANGA NAMASKAR  -  EIGHT LlMBS POSE 

From this position, lower yourself gently to the ground, 
touching your forehead, chest, and knees to the floor, 
while maintaining the bulk of your weight on your hands 
and toes. This is the eight limbs pose. The mantra 
acknowledges the nourishment the sun provides to all living beings on earth. It is associated with the solar plexus 
(energy) chakra and the Law of Intention and Desire. 




The mantra for the eight limbs pose is Om Pooshne 
Namaha. 

Move directly into the cobra pose, rising off the ground 
using primarily your back and chest muscles. Do not 
overextend by pushing off with your hands. The mantra 
for this pose acknowledges the inner light that is 
reflected in the outer light of the sun. This pose resonates 
with the creativity chakra and the Law of Least Effort. 




The mantra for the cobra pose is Om Hiranya Garbhya 
Namaha. 

Return Cycle 

The second half of the sun salutations is a retracing of the 
first half. Return again to the mountain pose, this time introducing the mantra Om Marichaya Namaha, which acknowledges the transformational power of the sun. The Sanskrit 
name for black pepper is marich; it is believed to contain 
large amounts of solar energy. 


Then move into the equestrian pose, this time with your 
left leg back. This mantra, Om Aditya Namaha, acknowledges the maternal nurturing aspect of the sun. 


Continue the cycle by moving into the hand to feet pose, 
using the mantra Om Savitre Namaha, which acknowledges the stimulating power of the sun. 


Then move into the sky reaching pose, reciting the 
mantra Om Arkaya Namaha, which acknowledges the 
energizing aspect of the sun. 


Finally, return to the beginning by moving back into the 
salutation pose, using the mantra Om Bhaskaraya 
Namaha, which acknowledges the aspect of the sun that 
kindles the memory of wholeness. 



The speed and vigor of the poses should be adjusted to 
suit your body type. It's best to start with a total of ten 
sets. As you become more comfortable, you can gradually 
increase the number. Breathe in harmony with the 



The Seven Spiritual Laws of Yoga 




movements, so that you're inhaling each time the body is 
extended and exhaling each time you move into flexion. 
The postures are most beneficial when performed in a 
smooth, flowing, sequential manner. 

According to yoga, if you do the sun salutations every 
day of your life, your mind will remain alert and vibrant 
and your body will be light and flexible. 



Sun Salutations in a Chair 

We believe that the sun salutations provide such benefit, 
and we have developed a modified version that can be performed in a chair. You can perform these modified sun 
salutations while riding as a passenger in a car on an 
extended road trip, sitting at your desk at work, or flying in 
an airplane. These poses relieve tension in your spine, 
enhance circulation, and ease soreness in your muscles. 

Begin with the salutation pose by sitting comfortably 
in your chair with your spine upright and your hands at 
your chest, breathing easily. 




Inhaling, reach upward with both hands into the sky 
reaching pose, extending your spine. 




IOO The Seven Spiritual Laws of Yoga 

Bending forward into the hand to feet pose, lay your 
chest on your knees and allow your hands to rest alongside 
your feet. Exhale. 




Arching your back into the extension pose (similar to 
the equestrian pose), pull your left knee up while looking 
toward the ceiling. Inhale. 




Consciousness in Motion IOI 

Partially exhale while bringing your chin down 
toward your left knee into the flexion pose (similiar to the 
mountain pose), gently rolling your back forward. 




Again, flex forward into the hand to feet pose with 
your chest on your knees and your hands on the floor 
next to your feet. Exhale fully. 




I02 The Seven Spiritual Laws of Yoga 

With your hands and arms remaining down by your 
legs, arch your back and neck into the cobra pose while 
inhaling partially. 




Now fully inhale as you bring your right knee up into 
the extension pose (similar to the equestrian pose) while 
extending your back in a gentle arch. 


Partially exhale as you bend forward into the flexion 
pose (similar to the mountain pose), bringing your chin to 
your right knee. 




Fully exhaling, bend forward into the hand to feet 
pose with your chest on your knees, your neck flexed, and 
your arms alongside your legs. 


Stretch upward into the sky reaching pose, extending 
your spine while fully inhaling. 




Return to the resting salutation pose with your hands 
at your chest, breathing easily. 


Energy-Opening Poses 

Life energy flows up and down the spinal column. In 
yoga, the seven chakras are connected through three 
energetic pathways known as Ida, Pingala, and Sushumna. 

Ida carries prana through the left side of the body, 
conducting feminine, lunar energy. When you are 
breathing through your left nostril, your Ida channel is 
open and receptive energy is active in your body/mind. 

Pingala is the conduit for energy on the right side of 
the body, transmitting masculine, solar energy. When 
you are breathing through your right nostril, your active, 
goal-directed energy is more dominant. 

Sushumna runs up the middle of the body, providing 
the connection between the root chakra at the base of the 
spine and the lotus center at the crown of the head. 

When these channels are open, vital energy is able to 
flow freely. The vital energy rising up through the spine is 
known as the awakening of Kundalini, 
sometimes visualized as the uncoiling of a snake at the base of the 
spine. These final poses are 
designed to release congestion 
in the spine, enabling prana to 
nourish every organ, tissue, and 
cell in your body. 

Matsyendrasana  -  Spinal Twist 
(Lord of the Fish Pose) 

Sit on the floor with your legs out in front of you. Bend 
your left leg and place your foot on the floor next to your 
right thigh. Place your right arm around your left knee and 




The Seven Spiritual Laws of Yoga 




hold your right knee while twisting your spine to the left. 
Hold this position, breathing easily. With every exhalation, allow yourself to surrender into the pose. 

Return to the midline and repeat the posture on the 
other side by bending your right leg and placing your 
right foot on the floor next to your left thigh. Place your 
left arm around your right knee while twisting your spine 


to the right. Again, breathe easily into the pose, using 
your breath to increase your flexibility. As you become 
more flexible, reach around and grasp the ankle of the foot 
that is placed on the floor. Hold for ten seconds, then 
return to center. 

Close your eyes for a few moments and put your 
attention on your spine. Envision the life force flowing up 
from the base of your spine through your pelvis, into your 
abdomen, up through your heart, through your throat, 
between your eyes, and into your head. Imagine the 
thousand-petal lotus flower at your crown chakra opening. 
Activate the intention to live your life from a more 
expanded state of awareness as a result of energy flowing 
freely through your body. 

According to Vedic mythology, Lord Shiva was instructing his consort Parvati on the essence of yoga on the 
shore of a remote island. Shiva noticed that a fish was listening intently to the discourse. Moved by the fish's concentration, Shiva gave a blessing over the aquatic animal, 
enabling it to assume a celestial form, whom Shiva named 
Matsyendra, or Lord of the Fishes. This pose is named in 
honor of this unusual sentient being. 



Chakrasana  -  Kneeling Wheel 

From the spinal twist pose, roll your legs around so that you 
are on your knees with your feet close together behind 
you. Arch your back and grasp your right ankle with your 
right hand and your left ankle with your left hand. Raise 
your hips up toward the ceiling while allowing your head 
to relax backward. Breathe easily in this position for 



The Seven Spiritual Laws of Yoga 




about ten seconds, then slowly lower your hips and raise 
yourself up, so you are again resting on your knees. Close 
your eyes and with your attention in your spine, envision 
energy moving up from your base to your skull. 

This pose opens the pelvis and the spine, strengthening the neck and back muscles. Be conscious of your 
breath while holding this pose, having the intention 
to expand your chest with each deep inhalation while 
you stretch upward. In addition to forming the shape of a 
wheel (chakra), this pose activates each energy center. 



Vajrasana  -  Diamond Pose 

Beginning on your knees with your body upright, gently 
lower yourself down until you are sitting on your heels. 
Rest in this position for a few moments, then lift yourself 





off your heels. Again allow yourself to settle onto your 
heels. Become aware of your breathing and allow yourself 
to relax more deeply with each breath. Activating the 
Law of Intention and Desire, envision energy freely flowing up your spine. 

This is an energizing pose that awakens energy in the 
lower chakras. With practice you will see increasing 
flexibility in your hips, knees, and ankles. It provides 
benefits for people suffering with digestive disturbances 
and hemorrhoids. 



The diamond is the precious gem that has the highest 
spiritual frequency representing purity and eternity. It 
has the ability to cut through almost everything else in 
the world. The diamond pose awakens the balanced 
state of mind-body integration that allows you to cut 
through ignorance with the wisdom of the infinite and 
unbounded field of life. 

Matsyasana  -  Fish Pose 

The fish pose provides a similar stretch to the spine as the 
diamond pose, but it is a little easier for most people. Not 
to be confused with the Lord of the Fish pose, matsya 
opens the chest, allowing for greater lung aeration. It is 
classically performed in a full lotus position, but it can also 
be done in half-lotus. 

Sitting comfortably in the lotus posture, gently lower 
your back so you are lying on the floor with your crossed 
legs in the air. Place your palms flat on the floor just 
underneath your buttocks. While arching your back, 
lower your crossed legs to the floor. Resting on your bent 
elbows and forearms, continue arching your back until 
the crown of your head is on the floor. Breathe easily 
while holding this position for fifteen seconds. Then 
lower your back to the floor and slowly uncross your legs. 




If you are unable to get into a full lotus, you can perform a simpler modification of the fish pose. Lying on 
your back, bend your knees and bring your heels as close as 
you can to your buttocks. Bear your weight on your 



Consciousness in Motion 






elbows and forearms while arching your back until you are 
able to rest the top of your head on the floor. Feeling the 
stretch in your neck and back, hold this posture for fifteen 
seconds, then slowly lower your back and then your legs to 
the ground. 

Balasana  -  Child's Pose 

Kneeling on the floor, overlap your big toes and sit on your 
heels. Separate your knees and slowly bend forward until 
you are resting your body between your thighs. Lay your 
hands on the floor alongside your torso, palms up, and 
release your shoulders toward the floor. Rest your forehead 
on the floor and breathe easily. 




The child's pose is a comfortable resting posture 
that allows you to quiet your mind as your body settles 
into deeper relaxation. In many ways it is the asana 
equivalent of the fetal position. Bring the Law of Least 
Effort into your awareness as you surrender into the 

child's pose, feeling the sense of inner safety that this 
posture generates. 

Children are flexible and have an amazing capacity to 
adapt to changing situations even as they have limited 
ability to control the course of their own lives. Despite the 
fact that they are subject to the will of adults who direct 
their lives, children are able to find joy in their present 
moment. Flexibility and adaptability are valuable qualities 
that yoga can cultivate to reestablish some of the 
resiliency of youth. 

Carl Jung once said that as children we have unconscious perfection. As adults we become conscious of our 
imperfection. Finally, with wisdom we achieve a state of 
conscious perfection. 

The child's pose provides an opportunity to quiet the 
mind, relax the body, and celebrate the state of conscious 
perfection. Whenever you feel that the demands of the 
world are becoming too burdensome, assume this pose 
and allow the Law of Least Effort and the Law of Detachment to spontaneously awaken within you. 

Yoga in Action 

The human body is designed for movement. When you 
are able to move freely, effortlessly, and in harmony with 
your environment, you experience joy and vitality on all 
levels of life. This is the highest expression of the Law of 
Dharma  -  established in a state of expanded inner awareness, you perform activity with dynamic ease. The regular 
practice of yoga enables you to expand your limitations. 
As the body becomes more flexible, the mind becomes 
more flexible. As the body gains strength, the mind gains 

strength. As you learn to maintain a centered state of 
balance physically, you spontaneously feel more centered 
and balanced mentally and emotionally. 

According to the Seven Spiritual Laws, you have the 
potential to create a magnificent life filled with wisdom, 
success, and love. The creative cauldron of Pure Potentiality resides within you in the domain of silence at the 
source of your mind and body. You can access this field 
through the stillness cultivated in your practice of yoga. 

Joy in life flows from the effortless giving and receiving that derives from a deep connectedness to spirit. 
Every breath and movement you perform in yoga reminds 
you to allow vital energy to flow freely between your personal body and your extended body, spontaneously awakening the Law of Giving and Receiving in your life. 

The Law of Karma reminds you that every action has 
its reaction. Performing actions consciously in your yoga 
practice ensures that the reactions generated by your 
choices are more likely to be evolutionary for you and for 
those around you. 

Opening to the possibility that you don't have to 
struggle so hard to achieve your goals is the essence of the 
Law of Least Effort. Every practice session of yoga 
reminds you of this basic principle. If you force yourself 
into a posture, you will almost certainly pay the price the 
next day of decreased rather than increased flexibility. 
Yoga is practice for living life with finesse. 

Your intentions orchestrate their fulfillment. Become 
aware of the Law of Intention and Desire in your yoga 
practice as you move into every posture. Introduce your 
intention and then let go. It is this paradoxical coexistence of the Law of Intention and Desire along with the 

Law of Detachment that taps into the power of nature to 
support your deepest aspirations. 

Every moment is as it should be. From the beginning 
of time and space, the universe has been unfolding as 
through unfathomable multidimensional coincidences. 
Struggling against this moment is struggling against the 
entire universe. 

The practice of yoga awakens the Law of Dharma in 
your life by teaching you to feel your way. Your body is 
capable of calculating the most evolutionary choices 
available to you at every moment. You simply need to be 
able to listen to the signals it is sending you in its desire to 
support your happiness and health. 

A yogic practice eliminates the static in the communication lines between your mind and body. The clarity, 
flexibility, balance, strength, and centered awareness that 
you cultivate while practicing your postures will serve you 
well throughout your day and throughout your life. 




The Seven Spiritual 
Laws of Yoga Session 

Y 



We have what we seek. It is there all the time, and 
if we give it time it will make itself known to us. 

 -  Thomas Merton 



You now have all the components for the complete 
Seven Spiritual Laws of Yoga program. The full 
program is designed to take your body and mind from a 
state of deep silence through conscious breathing into 
positions that enhance flexibility, strength, and balance. 
Vigorous performance of the sun salutations will also 
help condition your cardiovascular system, while energygoverning exercises enable you consciously to channel 
your vital force. After performing the physical techniques, we encourage you to spend a few minutes bringing 
the spiritual law of the day into your awareness so it 




remains lively throughout the day. The major facets of the 
program include: 

Pranayama breathing exercises 

Meditation 

Flexibility postures 

Balance postures 

Sun salutations 

Bandhas 

Energy-opening postures 

The spiritual law of the day 

As a sign of commitment to the well-being of your 
body, mind, and soul, spend some time every day practicing yoga. When practicing on your own, an ideal session 
is as follows: 

Pranayama (5 to 10 minutes) 

Begin with five to ten minutes of pranayama breathing 
exercises. Start with several rounds of Bhastrika, or bellows 
breath, to clear your body of toxins. Then perform three or 
four Dirgha breaths, bringing air sequentially into your 
lower, middle, and upper lung spaces. Next, shift into 
Ujjayi breathing for several minutes, slowly inhaling and 
exhaling with a slight contraction of your throat muscles. 
Finally, move into Nadi Shodhana, or alternate nostril 
breathing. Partially close your eyes as you perform Nadi 
Shodhana to draw your attention inward. Depending 
upon how much time you have available, spend five to ten 
minutes performing your breathing exercises. 

Bhastrika (1 to 2 minutes)  -  bellows breath 

Dirgha (1 to 2 minutes)  -  complete breath 

Ujjayi (1 to 2 minutes)  -  success breath 

Nadi Shodhana (2 to 4 minutes)  -  clearing 
breath 



So Hum Meditation 
(10 to 30 minutes) 

After clearing the subtle channels of circulation with 
your pranayama breathing exercises, you are ready to 
take your attention to a more expanded state of awareness 
through meditation. Close your eyes completely and simply become aware of your thoughts for a few moments, 
then sequentially bring your attention to each of the 
seven chakras, audibly intoning the mantra for each 
energy center. 

After awakening these junction points between 
the mind and the body, it is time to calm your mind. 
Begin your silent meditation by practicing breathing 
awareness using the So Hum mantra or any other mindquieting procedure you have learned. We encourage you 
to learn Primordial Sound Meditation from a qualified 
instructor. 

Meditation ideally is practiced for twenty to thirty 
minutes. If you cannot accommodate this full-time, allow 
for at least ten minutes of meditation during your yoga 
practice. Always take a few minutes at the end of your 
meditation to gently stretch and move before opening 
your eyes. 



The Seven Spiritual Laws of Yoga 



Flexibility Postures 
(10 to 20 minutes) 

Having cleared your channels and quieted your mind, 
you are now ready to begin moving energy consciously 
through the yoga poses. Begin with the flexibility poses, 
taking a minute or two to move into each of the nine 
postures. 






IoO The Seven Spiritual Laws of Yc 






The Seven Spiritual Laws of Yoga Session IOI 







Io2 The Seven Spiritual Laws of Yc 




Balancing Postures (5 to 10 minutes) 

With enhanced flexibility, you naturally become better at 
maintaining your balance. Spend about a minute in each 
of the six balancing poses, noticing how your inner mental turbulence quiets as you find your physical center. 




4. Dandayamana KonasanaStanding Angle Pose 




5. Dandayamana Dhanurasana  -  
Standing Bow Pose 








Sun Salutations (5 to 20 minutes) 

The flowing sequential movements of the sun salutations 
can be performed slowly or energetically. In the context of 
this sequence, we recommend you perform your twelve 

postures briskly. Begin with six sets, which may take you 
about five minutes, gradually progressing until you are 
performing sun salutations for fifteen to twenty minutes. 
In addition to stretching your muscles and joints, you 
will exercise your heart and improve your circulation. 



Io6 The Seven Spiritual Laws of Yc 









loo The Seven Spiritual Laws of Yc 




if* 




Bandhas (2 to 5 minutes) 

It is useful at this stage to perform your energy-governing 
techniques. Begin with the chin lock bandha, in which 
you fully exhale, flexing your head forward, and then 
inhale against a closed throat. Release after several seconds, then begin the stomach-lift bandha, in which you 
raise your stomach using your abdominal and diaphragm 
muscles. Finally, awaken the energy at the base of your 
spine by performing the root bandha, contracting your 
sphincter muscles. 

Jalandhara bandha (1 minute)  -  chin lock 
Uddiyana bandha (1 minute)  -  stomach lift 
Moola bandha (1 minute)  -  root lock 






The Seven Spiritual Laws of Yoga 



Energy-Opening Postures 
(5 to 10 minutes) 

Ending your asana set with these four energy-opening 
poses enables you to channel vitality into all aspects of 
your life. Perform each of these postures with conscious 
awareness, allowing the life force to flow effortlessly into 
every organ, tissue, and cell of your body. 









The Seven Spiritual Laws of Yoga 



Activate the Spiritual Law 
of the Day (5 minutes) 

At the end of your program, lie on your back with your 
arms at your sides and allow your total awareness to be in 
your body. Enjoy the sensations generated by consciously 
moving the life force through you. 

Bring the spiritual law of the day into your awareness, 
committing to enlivening it by attending to the three 
activating intentions. As a result of the expanded awareness, flexibility, and balance you have generated in your 
practice, the law of the day will spontaneously support you 
in the fulfillment of your deepest desires. 

Spiritual Law of the Day 

Activating Intentions 2. Commune with nature 1 . Practice breath awareness 3. Acknowledge your needs 2. Consider the consequences 1. Practice acceptance 3. Be defenseless 2. Trust the outcome 

3. Practice present moment 
awareness 



Day 


Spiritual Law 


Sunday 


Pure Potentiality 


Monday 


Giving and 




Receiving 


Tuesday 


Karma (or Cause 




and Effect) 


Wednesday 


Least Effort 


Thursday 


Intention and 




Desire 



Day 


Spiritual Law 


Activating Intentions 


Friday 


Detachment 
2. Embrace uncertainty 

3. Surrender to the field of 
pure potentiality 


Saturday 


Dharma 



(or Purpose 


witness 




in Life) 
3. Serve others 



Prioritizing 

If you spend some time in each stage of this program, you 
can spend as little as three-quarters of an hour or almost 
two hours in your practice. Decide for yourself the pace 
and intensity that you can execute. The time you spend 
will yield rewards physically, emotionally, and spiritually. 
Commit to this program for one month and you will be a 
yogi for life. 



Conclusion 



Y 



From here, what you see you become. 

 -  Patanjali 



According to Indian philosophy, yoga is the system of 
gaining knowledge through direct experience. A 
chemist may understand the molecular basis of a strawberry. A geneticist may understand the DNA sequences 
that underlie different varieties of strawberries. A botanist 
may know the precise soil and water requirements for a 
strawberry plant to thrive. A yogi knows the strawberry by 
taking a bite. 

Yoga declares that you can understand reality by consciously experiencing the different layers of your life  -  
physical, mental, and spiritual. By tuning in to the 
sensations of your body, you can understand the workings 
of physiology. By listening to your inner dialogue, you 
can understand the nature of the mind. By going beyond 


your body and your mind, you can directly experience 
your essential spiritual core. 

Yoga encourages you to expand your sense of self so 
you can solve the challenges that arise in your life. Each of 
us is a heroic character on the battlefield of life. The 
perennial story of life is depicted in the Indian classic, the 
Bhagavad Gita, in which the forces of good and the forces 
of evil find residence in two clans of the same family. The 
Pandava clan, led by Arjuna, represents right action in 
accordance with natural law. The Kauravas, headed by 
Duryodhana, represent action performed with limited 
awareness resulting in outcomes that cause suffering to 
those affected by the choices made. The Bhagavad Gita 
begins with these two opposing forces on the battlefield of 
life preparing for massive conflict. 

Both Arjuna and Duryodhana ask Lord Krishna, representing the state of expanded consciousness, for support. Krishna offers one leader the use of his army while 
the other gets him as his personal charioteer. Duryodhana gets to choose first and takes the army, believing 
that the power of might will provide him the greatest 
benefit. The power of expanded awareness in the form of 
Krishna goes to Arjuna. 

Krishna takes Arjuna above the battlefield, where 
Arjuna confesses his confusion about what to do. On the 
one hand, he believes it is his duty to fight his relatives who 
have created havoc in the world. On the other hand, he 
feels tremendous compassion for the uncles and cousins 
who have played important roles in his life. Arjuna is paralyzed by his inner battle. The tremendous value of yoga is 
the depiction of this classic conflict between heart and 
mind that each of us faces during our lives. 

While time is suspended, Krishna teaches Arjuna the 
essence of yoga, telling him that good and evil, pleasure 
and pain, and loss and gain are two sides of the same coin 
of life. The solution that yoga offers is to go beyond the 
realm of duality and become established in the state of 
being that is beyond time, space, and causality. Once 
rooted in this connection to spirit, Arjuna is exhorted to 
enter into battle to rebalance the forces of nature. 

Krishna tells Arjuna, "Go beyond the realm of good 
and evil where life is dominated by beginnings and endings. Enter into the domain of yoga, where all duality 
finds its unity. Established in unity, perform activity that 
supports dharma." 

This is the ultimate purpose of a yoga practice. Yoga 
takes you into the realm of Pure Potentiality, where anything is possible. It awakens the Law of Giving and 
Receiving as you become aware of the continuous 
exchange of your life energy with the life energy of the universe. Flexing and extending through your poses, you 
express the Law of Karma as you recognize that every 
action generates a proportionate reaction. The Law of 
Least Effort becomes lively as you surrender into each posture, releasing rather than forcing your way into a position. 
Combining the Law of Intention with the Law of Detachment, yoga demonstrates that introducing your desire and 
allowing nature to orchestrate its fulfillment maximizes 
achievement while minimizing strain. Finally, moving 
gracefully, sensitively, and consciously is the technology of 
living the Law of Dharma in which your actions have a positive effect on you and your environment. 

Any reason for practicing yoga is a good reason. 
Enhancing flexibility and releasing stress are as noble a 

purpose for performing yoga as the awakening of spirituality. This is the great gift of yoga  -  it serves and nourishes 
us at every level of our being and spontaneously contributes to greater well-being in all domains of life. 

The practice of yoga is worthy of your valuable time 
and attention. Yoga will help you discover gifts within 
yourself that have remained unopened since your childhood  -  gifts of peace, harmony, laughter, and love. 



Like a personal computer, science needs a recycle bin for ideas that didn't work out as planned. In this bin would go commuter trains riding on frictionless rails using superconductivity, along with interferon, the last AIDS vaccine, and most genetic therapies. These failed promises have two things in common: They looked like the wave of the future but then reality proved too complex to fit the simple model that was being offered.

The next thing to go into the recycle bin might be the brain. We are living in a golden age of brain research, thanks largely to vast improvements in brain scans. Now that functional MRIs can give snapshots of the brain in real time, researchers can see specific areas of the brain light up, indicating increased activity. On the other hand, dark spots in the brain indicate minimal activity or none at all. Thus, we arrive at those familiar maps that compare a normal brain with one that has deviated from the norm. This is obviously a great boon where disease is concerned. Doctors can see precisely where epilepsy or Parkinsonism or a brain tumor has created damage, and with this knowledge new drugs and more precise surgery can target the problem.

But then overreach crept in. We are shown brain scans of repeat felons with pointers to the defective areas of their brains. The same holds for Buddhist monks, only in their case, brain activity is heightened and improved, especially in the prefrontal lobes associated with compassion. By now there is no condition, good or bad, that hasn't been linked to a brain pattern that either "proves" that there is a link between the brain and a certain behavior or exhibits the "cause" of a certain trait. The whole assumption, shared by 99 percent of neuroscientists, is that we are our brains.

In this scheme, the brain is in charge, having evolved to control certain fixed behaviors. Why do men see other men as rivals for a desirable woman? Why do people seek God? Why does snacking in front of the TV become a habit? We are flooded with articles and books reinforcing the same assumption: The brain is using you, not the other way around. Yet it's clear that a faulty premise is leading to gross overreach.

The flaws in current reasoning can be summarized with devastating force:

1. Brain activity isn't the same as thinking, feeling, or seeing.

2. No one has remotely shown how molecules acquire the qualities of the mind.

3. It is impossible to construct a theory of the mind based on material objects that somehow became conscious.

4. When the brain lights up, its activity is like a radio lighting up when music is played. It is an obvious fallacy to say that the radio composed the music. What is being viewed is only a physical correlation, not a cause.

It's a massive struggle to get neuroscientists to see these flaws. They are king of the hill right now, and so long as new discoveries are being made every day, a sense of triumph pervades the field. "Of course" we will solve everything from depression to overeating, crime to religious fanaticism, by tinkering with neurons and the kinks thrown into normal, desirable brain activity. But that's like hearing a really bad performance of "Rhapsody in Blue" and trying to turn it into a good performance by kicking the radio.

We've become excited by a flawless 2008 article published by Donald D. Hoffman, professor of cognitive sciences at the University of California Irvine. It's called "Conscious Realism and the Mind-Body Problem," and its aim is to show, using logic, philosophy, and neuroscience, that we are not our brains. We are "conscious agents" -- Hoffman's term for minds that shape reality, including the reality of the brain. Hoffman is optimistic that the thorny problem of consciousness can be solved, and science can find a testable model for the mind. But future progress depends on researchers abandoning their current premise, that the brain is the mind. We urge you to read the article in its entirety, but for us, the good news is that Hoffman's ideas show that the tide may be turning.

It is degrading to human potential when the brain uses us instead of vice versa. There is no doubt that we can become trapped by faulty wiring in the brain -- this happens in depression, addictions, and phobias, for example. Neural circuits can seemingly take control, and there is much talk of "hard wiring" by which some activity is fixed and preset by nature, such as the fight-or-flight response. But what about people who break bad habits, kick their addictions, or overcome depression? It would be absurd to say that the brain, being stuck in faulty wiring, suddenly and spontaneously fixed the wiring. What actually happens, as anyone knows who has achieved success in these areas, is that the mind takes control. Mind shapes the brain, and when you make up your mind to do something, you return to the natural state of using your brain instead of the other way around.

It's very good news that you are not your brain, because when your mind finds its true power, the result is healing, inspiration, insight, self-awareness, discovery, curiosity, and quantum leaps in personal growth. The brain is totally incapable of such things. After all, if it is a hard-wired machine, there is no room for sudden leaps and renewed inspiration. The machine simply does what it does. A depressed brain can no more heal itself than a car can suddenly decide to fly. Right now the golden age of brain research is brilliantly decoding neural circuitry, and thanks to neuroplasticity, we know that the brain's neural pathways can be changed. The marvels of brain activity grow more astonishing every day. Yet in our astonishment it would be a grave mistake, and a disservice to our humanity, to forget that the real glory of human existence is the mind, not the brain that serves it.



Skepticism has gotten itself into a pickle -- perhaps something a lot more serious than a pickle -- that is undermining its good name. The credibility of Wikipedia may be at stake (see below). We live in a skeptical age because the cornerstone of science, "Everything must be verified" is a skeptical position. When a researcher claims to have accomplished something remarkable, such as cold fusion, his experiment must be replicated before it will be believed. The need to verify, to lay out credible facts, has become second nature, and not just for scientists.

Facts, data, information, research findings, statistics -- these are woven into every aspect of our lives.  Which means that skepticism is woven in, too. Hence its good name. Without accurate polls, politicians would be lost (consult Mitt Romney, who believed in skewed polls all the way to election night).  But there is no reason for skepticism to become a militant crusade. Facts are facts, as the saying goes, and when a political ideology like Fascism identified Einstein as someone who conducted "Jewish science" (a term coined by the Nazis), such a label is not simply abhorrent -- it misconstrues what science actually is, a universal enterprise that has no place for personal, religious, or political prejudice.

The rise of militant skepticism clouded the picture, however, beginning with its popular attack on religion. The aim of Richard Dawkins, as stated in his best seller, The God Delusion, was to subject "the God hypothesis" to scientific scrutiny, the way one would subject anti-matter or black holes to scrutiny. In fact he did no such thing with God, for the scientific method requires experiments that can be replicated and facts that can be verified. Dawkins offered no experiments to prove or disprove the existence of God. What he actually did was to subject religion to a barrage of scorn and ridicule, attacking it on the rational improbability -- as he sees it -- that a deity could possibly exist.

The commercial success of his book wasn't hard to explain.  Long ago Darwin's theory of evolution had toppled the creation story found in the Book of Genesis, and through a domino effect the toppling continued. By the time The God Delusion appeared in 2006, organized religion was still in decline, and millions of readers were happy to seize on a "scientific" book that relieved them of any guilt over not going to church or temple. Atheism was held out by Dawkins as the only enlightened position one could take on the God question. He anticipated that readers would flock to become atheists with himself in the lead, a social movement that never, in fact, materialized.  Polls continue to show that well over 80 percent of people believe in God, and something like one in eight atheists go to church, while no massive surge in unbelief has occurred.

The God Delusion, aided by a handful of other best sellers attacking religion in the same vein, did have one decisive effect, however.  Science became yoked to the tools of rhetoric and demagoguery, going so far as to lose any trace of objectivity. These tools, once shunned by science, were useful to Dawkins, given that he had no actual scientific proof that God doesn't exist. Hostile reviewers cried foul, but the complaints came from a mixed lot of religious fundamentalists, philosophers, and theologians who hardly presented a united front.  Among the most educated and the least educated groups, Dawkins had no credibility. But the job had been done. It was now "scientific" for militant skepticism to practice forms of intellectual dishonesty that have only proliferated.

Thanks to the Internet, skepticism can spread with the speed of light, carrying in its wake all forms of unfairness and bad faith. A distressing example has been occurring at Wikipedia, where a band of committed skeptics have focused their efforts to discredit anyone whom they judge an enemy.  The problem has been slow to gain traction in the public arena, because Wikipedia has constructed an elaborate set of rules to minimize editorial bias. Ironically, the skeptics have turned these rules, which run to hundreds of pages, to their advantage. They have become so skilled at thwarting anyone who disagrees with their point of view that a small swarm of skeptical editors is capable of outnumbering, bullying, and even banning all those who oppose them.

You can see the results at the Wikipedia entry for Rupert Sheldrake, the British biologist who has served as a lightning rod for militant skeptics for several decades.  Intelligent, highly trained, an impeccable thinker, and a true advocate for experimentation and validation, Sheldrake had the temerity to be skeptical about the everyday way that science is conducted. He made his first splash by questioning the accepted assumptions of Darwinian evolution, and most recently he published a cogent, well-received book about the hidden weaknesses in the scientific method, titled Science Set Free.  His avowed aim is to expand science beyond its conventional boundaries in the hope that a new path to discovery can be opened up.

But you'd never know it from Sheldrake's Wikipedia entry, which is largely derogatory and even defamatory, thanks to a concerted attack by a stubborn band of militant skeptics. Since I am close to Sheldrake personally and have Wikipedia woes of my own, it's not fair for me to offer accusations over the extent to which Wikipedia is under attack. But the skeptics have been caught in the act, which is the pickle they find themselves in, as I mentioned at the outset of this post.

You can read a detailed account in a series of online posts written by Craig Weiler at his blog The Weiler Psi. Confronting the militant pests at Wikipedia resembles taking hold of a tar baby, as Weiler relates in his most recent post, pointedly entitled "Wikipedia: The Only Way to Win Is Not to Play."   The unsavory fact is that skeptics have figured out how to game Wikipedia's attempts to provide fairness, and we are all the loser for it.

Dawkins and the militant skeptics are symptoms of a deeper problem that turns out to have fascinating implications. Noisy as they are, these hostile crusaders have had no impact on the everyday activity of doing science or keeping faith. But that is about to change. The deep question of what is real is one that contemporary science can no longer avoid. How this is leading to the decline of skepticism makes for an intriguing mystery story, which will be discussed in the next post.



As an attitude, skepticism is a natural part of the scientific method. It calls for solid proof and verification. As an agenda, however, the story of skepticism is quite different. The way that strident atheism has clothed itself in science seems convincing to people who are skeptical about God in the first place. But there's no scientific basis for atheism, since God isn't subject to experimentation. As the dust has settled, the agenda of militant skepticism has come to light - it's basically another symptom of the blogosphere's culture of personal attack, unfounded allegation, and a reckless disregard for the truth.

None of this is news. The fate of militant skepticism, whatever it may be, will drift apart from the serious business of doing science. After all, no scientific discovery was ever made by negative thinking. There has to be an open-minded curiosity and a willingness to break new ground, while the militant skeptics represent the exact opposite: they are dedicated to the suppression of curiosity and protecting rigid boundaries of "real" science.

But by a strange and unexpected chain of events, real science finds itself at a turning point where skepticism itself is proving to be a dubious attitude. The standby of the scientific method - gathering objective data to prove objective facts - has been undermined. The reason for this cannot be stated in a single sentence, because too many shadowy findings, suppositions, and theoretical conundrums are woven together. The leading issues can be stated briefly as follows:

Objectivity has been undermined by the measurement problem in quantum physics, which must account for how the observer actually changes or influences the thing he observes.
Also from quantum physics, the Uncertainty Principle undercut the notion of solid, tangible atoms and molecules existing in fixed locations. No one is sure about the implications for the human brain, since it is composed of atoms and molecules whose status is tied into the mystery of consciousness.
The emergence of time and space, either through the Big Bang or at this very moment, remains mysterious. The pre-created state of the universe is a deep mystery.
The whole issue of consciousness, long ignored because of science's aversion to subjectivity, has become a major concern, principally for two reasons. The assumption that the brain is the producer of the mind has never been proved; therefore, it presents the possibility of being wrong. Second, if consciousness is more like a field effect than a unique human trait, the universe itself could be conscious, or at least possess the qualities of proto-consciousness, just as DNA possesses the possibility for Homo sapiens even at the stage when life forms were only single-celled organisms. 
These four mysteries or problems, whatever you label them, undercut skepticism - and more or less demolish militant skepticism - because they make science question its belief in such things as materialism, reductionism, and objectivity. That's too many "isms" for a non-scientist to really care about, and there's no doubt that the everyday work of science proceeds as usual without regard for issues that many would dismiss as metaphysics. But such an attitude is the same as accepting a dead end. For without asking the deepest questions about what is real and how do we know the truth, the current state of physics and biology will be mired in speculation and doubt.

Let's drop the bugaboo about metaphysics and look with open eyes at two critical aspects of philosophy that can come to the aid of science at this moment. One is ontology, which asks what is reality? or how can we discover the difference between reality and illusion? The other is epistemology, which asks what is knowledge? and how do we come to know about the world? Neither looks like a burning issue in everyday life, but they are, because each has a positive and negative pole.

The positive pole is located at the horizon of particle physics and cosmology, where figuring out what is real has become urgent business, now that the solid, tangible world of the five senses has been thoroughly undermined. It has become an object of fascinated study to look beyond our perception of space and time, and since the human brain operates in space and time, this new horizon requires sophisticated thinking about thinking itself.

The negative pole is found with militant skeptics, who are wedded to an outmoded belief that the five senses are basically reliable, that only physical things are real, and that "pure" objectivity is possible, with the corollary that subjectivity will always be the enemy of real science. This last belief totally ignores the indisputable fact that every experience, including the experience of doing science, is subjective. Militant skepticism blocks the way to an expanded science that is trying to grapple with the issue of how the observer is woven into the object he observes.

In the next post we'll consider how irrelevant and misguided the skeptical agenda is proving to be by offering specific examples from the work of two popular skeptics, Sam Harris and Richard Dawkins, whose intention to keep science pure and objective has led them into blind alleys and rigid thinking - the very things science should avoid at all cost.



The bond between militant atheism and militant skepticism has been unusually strong, to the point where attacks on religion are delivered as if no rational, science-minded person could object. In two posts the argument was laid out about how shaky militant skepticism really is in the light of current physics and cosmology. So that the discussion won't seem too arcane and removed from everyday life, this post will examine the fallacies that undermine the skeptical position of two popular skeptics, Sam Harris and Richard Dawkins.

Since both have scientific credentials, readers of their books should have confidence that Harris and Dawkins are getting their science right. But it takes only a slightly deeper examination to raise doubts. In his book for young adults, The Magic of Reality, Dawkins provides a subtitle: How we know what is really true. It turns out, on reading what he has to say about truth and reality, that Dawkins believes firmly in the truth presented by the five senses, along with the scientific instruments, like telescopes and microscopes, that extend our senses. But reliance on the five senses is the exact opposite of what modern science has been doing for centuries, as far back as Copernicus's discovery that our eyes lie to us when they see the sun rise in the East and set in the West.

The evident reason for Dawkins to make such an elementary mistake lies in his agenda (another thing science isn't supposed to have), which is to discredit all subjective states as unreliable, leading to superstition, credulity, myths, charlatanism (which he intimates is the basis of Jesus's miracles, although a loophole is left open in case Jesus was merely self-deluded), and the ultimate form of deception, belief in God. To date, Dawkins has offered no ontology (theory of reality) that corrects his mistake. Despite a fifteen-minute TED talk on quantum physics, he seems totally ignorant of current theories of perception, consciousness, the mind-body problem, or the observer effect, all of which grew out of the quantum revolution a century ago. In a word, he has made himself irrelevant by his crude linkage of his personal atheism and a fumbling defense of "real" science that was outmoded long ago.

Sam Harris presents a more sophisticated example because, to begin with, he claims a background in philosophy and a long-standing interest in Buddhism. Both areas are deeply concerned with what is real, how we know things, what constitutes the truth, and so on. In his atheist mode Harris is nastier and more strident even than Dawkins (for example, he sees all of Islam as a threat and a present danger, since even "good" Muslims are infected with the inherent violence of their religion). But in various footnotes and passing asides, Harris concedes that subjectivity isn't always the enemy of science. There are medical states, for instance, where the patients self-report of pain, depression, anxiety, etc. are the basis of reality. If a patient says "I'm in pain" or "I'm depressed," no brain scan is sufficient to say authoritatively, "No, you're not."

Harris came a cropper, however, in his last book, The Moral Landscape, when he made basic mistakes that a beginner in philosophy would be warned again. His errors earned the book scathing and dismissive reviews. Stung, he added a long appendix to the second edition defending himself, and when that made no dent, he offered a standing prize to anyone who could convince him that he was in fact wrong.

The thesis of The Moral Landscape is that "conscious minds... are... fully constrained by the laws of Nature (whatever those laws eventually turn out to be)." As it stands, the statement is recklessly absolutist, since it assumes that the operations of the cosmos, extending to an infinite horizon, are understandable by the human mind. Leaving that aside, Harris felt on safe ground because current scientific assumptions identify mind as brain, and there is no doubt that the brain is, indeed, constrained by the laws of nature. But reviewers balked when Harris attempted to firmly prove that morality has its basis in scientific principles operating over the course of evolution. He had made a shaky truce with subjectivity in the past. Now he wanted to bury subjectivity in an area, morality, where scientism is weak at best. Natural laws don't explain why humans are altruistic or love one another, much less do they explain our divided nature, where good and evil contend in an intractable, wholly inexplicable way.

Harris's boldness exposes his allegiance to bad thinking about what is real and how we know the truth. Specifically, this is the misunderstanding that follows from fusing ontology (what may be 'real') with epistemology (what may be 'true') without first making sure that one's apparent epistemological 'truths' are, in actuality, even real. To arrive at a 'truth-claim' in regards to consciousness and morality via the scientific method, without first understanding the fundamental subjective nature of either consciousness or morality, Harris cannot be certain that his claims are based in reality. For all truth-claims, are made by the human neurological system, and the human brain is not a reliable or valid guide to the actual 'reality of things'.

In a word, while Dawkins makes a crude claim that the five senses are reliable indicators of what is real, Harris makes a sophisticated claim in the same area, by assuming that the human brain, a physical object that evolved over millennia, is reliable as the model for everything that happens inside our minds. But if the five senses can't be trusted, neither can the brain, which processes the input of our sense organs and fashions them into a three-dimensional model of the world. The model isn't the same as reality. At best it is only provisional; at worst it may be very far from the truth, as witness hundreds of models from the past that have been thoroughly exploded (e.g., the Earth is the center of creation, blood washes back and forth in the body like the tide, etc.)

Harris may argue that the scientific method can "stand on its own" apart from the nervous system of the experimenter via the use of technological systems that run on the logic and language of mathematics, etc. However, the data which computers churn out still has to come in contact with the nervous system of the scientist in order for a theory of morality and human consciousness to be constructed. (The deep question of whether mathematics is universal or somehow mediated by the human nervous system has yet to be answered with any certainty.)

If Harris hadn't stretched his assumptions to the breaking point, he wouldn't have revealed that he was making the same mistakes when arguing against God. For God, of all things, exists on the cusp between what we know, what we think we know, and what is indisputably real. An arthritis patient's pain is indisputably real, even though subjective - in fact, it is real because it is subjective. There is no scientific proof that a report by a mystic that she feels the presence of God isn't real, and the subjectivity of the experience is the measure of its realness, not the measure of its illusory quality.

In a word, Harris and Dawkins, by turning their backs and scorning subjectivity, have fallen into traps of their own devising. Militant skepticism builds upon their mistakes, amplifies them, and employs scurrilous personal attacks to cover over their own intellectual flaws. In the end, the militant movement will collapse, not because the people who like God outnumber the people who dislike fear, and are suspicious of God. Skepticism's agenda is doomed because its thinking is basically unsound.



Most of us take perception for granted as a photograph - in five sensory dimensions - of the real world. If you walk past the house where you were born, however, you won't see it the way a camera would. You can't help but see it as a personal part of your life. A termite inspector would see it a different way, as would a zoning official, an architect, a landscaper, and so on. The fact is that we can take any perspective we want on any object in the universe. No one disputes this fact, but it can't be taken for granted, because there's a deep mystery about how we apply mental models to the reality that spreads out before us. The application of this mystery to the rise and fall of skepticism will become evident in a minute.

Increasing attention is being paid to the late Polish-American mathematician Alfred Korzybski (1879-1950), who has lent a popular phrase to this whole problem of what we see and what is real: "The map is not the territory." In a nutshell it captures the problem of believing in maps - or models - created by the human mind. It's obvious when you walk past the house where you were born that your mind creates the memory of growing up there. But some models are so convincing that we forget how we made them. Or we think the map is the territory, and then many missteps can arise. If you own a lovely house but all you can think of is that it might have termites or that burglars are waiting to rob you in the night, mounting anxiety can take over to the extent that you are ruled by your fixation. To someone with claustrophobia, an elevator is never neutral - it's the source of fear.

Skeptics are perfectly entitled to create and enjoy their own model of the world, but when it becomes a fixation, a valid aspect of the scientific method - demanding verification of facts - becomes a source of bullying, disdain, ad hominem attacks, and in the worst cases, blindness to reality. But since militant skepticism is essentially a nuisance born on the blogosphere, it wouldn't be a serious impediment to scientific thinking any more than booing fans cause a football team to march off the field. The importance of dismantling militant skepticism is minimal except when it comes to the kind of deeper investigation that Korzybski was interested in.

He devised mathematical theorems and non-Aristotelian logic to demonstrate that the neurological system of a scientist is engaging in a highly selective process - it consists of selecting out some information and omitting the remaining. This is the very essence of making a map, or a model. When you look at the house where you were born, there are literally thousands of facts about it that you ignore anytime you think about the house. How many nails have gone into the wooden framing? How many microbes and mold spores live behind the sheet rock? Who lives there now, and what are their lives like? Somewhere in the world somebody makes it their business to collect data on such questions and countless more, because our ability to select and discard is infinite. The skeptics' movement makes the mistake of giving certain models - basically their own, which is based on mistrust - a privileged position, when the truth is that all models have some advantages and some disadvantages.

The scientific model is abstract and reductionist. It isolates certain data (which are abstract) and organizes them to arrive at the essential qualities of an object (reducing it to pertinent facts). This is a fluid, dynamic, and subjective activity. But it's not the same as perceiving reality. Going to the most basic level of logic, one must concede that the human brain processes only the tiniest fraction of the billions of bits of sensory data that bombard us every day. We each have established our own filters for what we select and what we discard. If you are having chest pains and jump into your car to get to the emergency room, it won't matter to you what the scenery is like along the way. Expanded to the activity of science, what this says is that every one of us is participating in the universe in a personal, creative way. There is no fixed reality "out there."

So, how much weight should we give to how models differ from reality? Korzybski realized that there is an indefinite number of characteristics making up the physical environment that a scientist is unavoidably embedded within. He calculated the physical-energetic data impinging upon the sensory receptors of the scientist's neurological system before the system engages in further levels of abstraction. In other words, the threshold of data the your brain can process, is already an abstraction (a map) before you, or a scientist, starts to come up with newly created maps and models. For example, the simple fact that you can't hear frequencies as high as what a dog hears, means that your threshold for perception isn't perfect, complete, or even true. "This room is nice and quiet" isn't true for a dog being tormented by a persistent shrill noise in its ear that doesn't exist for you.

Science prides itself on investigating all kinds of things that the five senses don't pick up. But this extension of perception, astonishing as it is when the Hubble telescope images distant galaxies, still doesn't mean that science is viewing reality. Instead, it is expanding a map, putting in more detail. As Korzybski might point out, there is no way to NOT be embedded in the universe we observe. Here's the pathway that maps take before anyone engages with the universe: Physical-energetic data is conveyed by our sense organs and transduced (transformed) into electro-chemical nerve impulses, which are themselves even further decoded (translated) by other higher order levels of the brain into conceptual-linguistic (thought) interpretations of what is then experienced as "real."

If you suppose, as skeptics do, that science somehow transcends this intricate pathway, delivering "just the facts and only the facts," you are being naive. Take just one mystery, that of dark matter and energy. By current calculations, which are very imprecise, 96% of the universe may be composed of dark matter and energy, which no one can see or measure. The visible universe, which we rely upon as the very foundation of reality, amounts to 4% of what's out there. At the very least this means that the threshold of what the brain processes is a minuscule portion of the totality. If it turns out, as some theorists suspect, that dark matter isn't even based on atoms and molecules, how can the brain, itself composed of atoms and molecules, conceive of reality to begin with?

These are the kinds of mysteries that militant skepticism rails against when someone tries to deviate from the dogma of "the facts and nothing but the facts." It's not easy to come to terms with the interface between brain, mind, and reality. But to ridicule the investigation, as militant skeptics do, to denigrate someone else's model because you are the privileged keeper of truth, to shrug of advanced theories as pseudoscience - in other words, to own allegiance to the skeptical model - is pure ignorance.


Korzybski confronts us with a sobering but undeniable fact: As each level of abstraction occurs in the brain, more and more information is omitted. A scientist, like all of us, is both objectively and subjectively placed further and further away from what could be termed "really real reality." So what is that reality? As Korzybski pointed out, whatever reality might be, it transcends the confined, limited, and anthropomorphic point of view that we are tied to, because of the neurological system and its constructed map. Reality must be accounted for in its totality before any wide-scale truth claim, reality-claim, or thesis regarding morality and consciousness can be considered mildly sufficient -- no matter what field of study the claim is constructed within, whether that field is science, psychology, or philosophy. Until then, the Dawkins-Harris-Dennett movement, despite its noisiness, should take a lesson from Korzybski and realize that the map is not the territory.



The award of the Nobel Prize in physics generally creates a mental blur for most people, since no one can comprehend the current state of physics without training in advanced mathematics. This year was somewhat different, thanks to a nickname.

As the world learned on October 3, the British physicist Peter Higgs and the Belgian physicist Francois Englert shared the Nobel, as was widely expected in the profession. The award was given for a theory involving a missing particle in the so-called Standard Model of particle physics. The particle had come to be known as the Higgs boson when it was postulated or more popularly as "the God particle" from a 1993 book by Leon Lederman, another Nobel laureate who also served as the director of the prestigious Fermilab.

The discovery last year at CERN in Switzerland of the Higgs boson was a triumph for the Standard Model theory. Higgs and Englert, along with Robert Brout, Gerald Guralnik, C. R. Hagen, and Tom Kibble, had hypothesized the existence of a field filling the entire vacuum of space. If it hadn't been dubbed the God particle, physicists wouldn't be saddled with an embarrassing, catchy name. Meant initially as a joke, the enduring moniker suggests that in some way science has reached an ultimate destination. Creation has surrendered its final secret, even if there is no God. But in reality particle physics keeps moving forward, and after the celebration at finding a Higgs boson dies down, new frontiers will open up. Meanwhile, every physicist who is asked about the God particle takes pains to distance himself from the label, including Higgs himself.

Now that God has been invoked in the discussion, however, it's worth asking if we are getting closer to understanding Him/Her/It in a way that matters beyond the arcane of quantum physics.

Certainly a step was taken in our understanding of the finest fabric of the cosmos. In technical language, the ubiquitous Higgs field allows all particles in the universe to acquire mass through interactions with it, as the particles move through space, via a kind of dragging effect analogous to chunks of matter moving through molasses (elementary particles being the equivalent of the chunks and the Higgs field the molasses). High energy proton collisions at the Large Hadron Collider (LHC) at CERN revealed the elusive Higgs boson. The Higgs, unlike the photon, which is also a boson, has a mass, expected to be in the approximate range of 125 (or more) times the mass of the proton. Bosons are particles in quantum theory that carry forces - for example, the photon is the carrier of the electromagnetic force. They can be packed together in unlimited amounts. The Higgs boson is very unstable, instantly decaying after its creation into other particles prescribed by quantum field theory.

What's also clear is that particle physicists were willing to go to almost any lengths to provide evidence for this missing link. It took many billions of colliding protons in the huge LHC CERN accelerator, backed up by multitudes of computers around the world to painstakingly analyze the data, before the discovery of the God particle seemed real. Most physicists by now, although guarded, believe that some form of Higgs boson was in fact observed last summer. And the rapid award of the Nobel is a testament of that commonly-held belief. The difficulty of this achievement was underlined by the fact that the Higgs boson is so mysterious and fleeting that it took from 1964, when its existence was first proposed, until last March to verify that such a particle actually exists.

Being irritated by a nickname doesn't dispel the widespread belief that science is somehow getting very, very close to understanding the fundamental nature of reality. Some take an optimistic view of the road ahead. There is hope that the Higgs field may help bring together general relativity and quantum theory. Currently cosmologists believe that dark energy permeates the universe, evolving according to general relativity, and is responsible for an accelerating expansion of the universe. Although a standard Higgs particle would say little about dark energy, more exotic versions could provide theoretical understanding of it. Scientists will have to look at the LHC results on how the Higgs decays into other particles after it is produced in high energy collisions. The "dark" side of the universe poses both a new frontier and a stumbling block. Cosmologists seem to agree that all the luminous matter in the universe makes up only 4 percent of whatever exists. All the hundreds of billions of galaxies, composed of many billions of stars, make up just 4 percent of everything. The rest may be in the form of dark matter and even the more exotic (but unknown) dark energy. So if the "Higgs-like" particle discovered at CERN turns out to be the more exotic form, it could help us understand dark energy.

As Rolf-Dieter Heuer, director of the LHC project, stated in a 2011 talk, "The Higgs is neither matter nor force. The Higgs is just different." We won't go into the differences here, except to say that there is reason to assume that the Higgs isn't one of a kind but the opening wedge to an entire class of so-called scalar particles. One optimistic view of the results observed so far holds that the discovery will lead to new developments in particle physics. These would open up a finer level of the quantum domain and thus bring physics closer to its holy grail, a Theory of Everything, a grandiose-sounding, particle-based view of the cosmos.

The more pessimistic overview,( but as its proponents claim more realistic,) states that the LHC results have not given any evidence of the existence of other particles that would be needed to continue our understanding of the physics beyond the Higgs, to what is expected to be the next theoretical development, dubbed supersymmetry. As such, there's a major snag in attempts to ultimately develop a Theory of Everything. Even leaving arguments related to theories of physics aside, such a theory, as envisaged, doesn't say anything and in fact cannot say anything about life, evolution and the phenomena of mind and awareness. It is not even clear how gravity, the last of the four forces of nature described by general relativity, will fit into the Standard Model - at this point, a great deal of current theory, including the widely touted superstring theory, is interesting speculation.

It is inescapable that two worldviews, one scientific and technical, the other human and experiential, must either collide or converge. That is, the universe must make room for how human beings evolved in order to investigate the creation that gave rise to us. Any Theory of Everything that leaves the human dimension out - as particle physics tries overwhelmingly to do - cannot reach its goal. The Higgs boson, as viewed from the world we all experience every day, isn't simply arcane. It leads toward a collision of worldviews rather than a convergence. We will discuss what this means in the next post.



The "God particle" seems to be well and truly with us. The award on October 3 of the Nobel Prize in physics that focused on the Higgs boson - the technical term for the God particle - capped a decades-long search that has cost billions of dollars. In the first post we discussed why the discovery of the elusive, fleeting Higgs boson is two-edged. It represents a triumph in human curiosity and our drive to understand the universe. At the same time, however, a huge stumbling block hasn't been overcome. In fact, the Higgs boson may indicate that creation (whether God exists or not) is becoming ever more mysterious.

The mammoth collider at CERN Switzerland blasted the Higgs boson out of the invisible quantum field so that it could be observed, at the faintest level of measurement and then only for precious milliseconds. But this was enough to disclose the finest level of the subatomic realm so far known to be real. The problem with getting this close to the source of creation is that space, time, gravity, matter, and energy have become more and more ambiguous, as if the quantum revolution hadn't already done enough in that department. With the probability that so-called "dark" matter and energy may account for 96 percent of the universe - along with another probability, that "dark" stuff doesn't obey the same laws as visible mater and energy - the picture of creation is undergoing radical revision.

Stephen Hawking added to the ambiguity in his last book, The Grand Design, by siding with those who have basically given up on a Theory of Everything and are settling for a piecemeal patchwork or mosaic of theories, each pertaining to distinct regions of creation while never being synthesized into one grand design. If God exists, the deity must be smiling. For behind the high fives and hoopla over the Higgs boson, there's a growing doubt that we are anywhere near to understanding the nature of reality. These doubts arise from two major sources.

First, there's broad agreement that science doesn't comprehensively describe reality to begin with. Over a century ago the pioneers of quantum theory dismantled the common-sense notion that the world "out there" consists of hard, solid, tangible things. As one of the greatest of these pioneers, Werner Heisenberg, noted, "The atoms or elementary particles themselves are not real; they form a world of potentialities or possibilities rather than one of things or facts." No one has ever refuted this claim, and when you add into the mixture the Uncertainty Principle, which says that quantum objects can be located only by the probability that they will appear at a certain place (only after it is observed does a particle actually settle into a measurable position), the solid, tangible world is radically undermined.

The result is one of the greatest unsolved mysteries in science: How does the shadowy, invisible quantum domain transition into the familiar, reassuring world we perceive through the five senses? Something almost inconceivable is taking place, and to parallel this mystery, there is a second one. How did atoms and molecules give rise (if they did) to the thinking brain? The glucose that feeds your brain isn't very different from the sucrose in a sugar cube, but a sugar cube can't read this sentence, while your brain can. The starting point for solving these two mysteries was neatly summarized by the illustrious British neurologist Sir John Eccles: "I want you to realize that there exists no color in the natural world, and no sound - nothing of this kind; no textures, no patterns, no beauty, no scent."

Until very recently the two mysteries we've described (leaving out others that are more technical, such as the debate over Einstein's cosmological constant) were essentially shrugged off by working physicists, who are content to accept the ordinary, common-sense world when they drive their cars, and who delve into the quantum domain as if it were a separate reality, which it isn't.

The second reason that physics might be very far from understanding creation can be traced to the failure, now decades old, to mesh the two greatest achievements of twentieth-century physics - Einstein's General Theory of Relativity and Quantum Mechanics. It's highly embarrassing that two such spectacular intellectual discoveries don't agree with each other. We won't go into the technical reasons for the disagreement. It's enough to say that trying to make them mesh has led theorists to the very brink of creation, to the boundary in spacetime where space and time emerge from a pre-created state. (One reason for celebrating the Higgs boson is that it represents a minuscule but vital step toward the pre-created state).

So the popular sentiment that we are near the big answers to big questions is hardly shared by many theoretical physicists who know more about their own theories. There is certainly a camp that believes the only way forward is to build more powerful particle accelerators to probe finer and finer fabrics of Nature, while another camp sees a way forward beyond the Standard Model and supersymmetry, through string theory, which offers a possible mathematical mode for the pre-created state (mathematics becomes the only guide left, since imagining the quantum vacuum, which precedes time and space, is mentally impossible).

Speaking for ourselves, we side with a small but farseeing group who turn for answers to consciousness, working from an unassailable fact: Reality, as far as humans are concerned, consists of the things we experience. Even the most arcane activity of physicists - and the Higgs boson is extremely arcane - are experiences; so is mathematics - if the laws of mathematics exist outside our experience, we will never know that or be able to prove it. For decades consciousness has been dismissed by "real" scientists as simply a given. But Max Planck, the founder of quantum physics, was as real a scientist as you can get, and he said this: "I regard consciousness as fundamental. We cannot get behind consciousness. "

This belief that mind is inescapable, that so-called "objective" science must one day come to grips with subjectivity, was shared by any number of quantum pioneers but got put on the shelf while the thrust of physics remained physical. The vast majority of physicists continue to work and think as if mind shouldn't be part of their equations. As long as such a belief persists, despite its self-contradiction (can the mind really ignore the mind?) there will be more elementary particles for expensive machines to blast out of the vacuum state. At the same time, God will rest comfortably that creation's greatest mysteries haven't been revealed. At some point, perhaps in the near future, science will finally accept, and awards will soon follow, that the mind cannot be left out of the picture that the mind studies.



We know very little about what it takes to be happy, and a lot of what we know is wrong. This seems to be the conclusion of some voices in the movement known as positive psychology. It's a relatively new field set against the traditional focus of psychology, which has delved into neurosis, psychosis, and mental illness generally. Positive psychology studies normality and tries to improve it. Is happiness normal? That depends on who you ask.

Pollsters, for example, usually find that happiness is quite common; around 8 out of 10 people in the U.S. report that they are happy. This number fluctuates with the rise and fall of events. A recent Gallup finding is that Syrians and Iraqis have the highest rate of negative thoughts -- not a surprise -- while people in South America have the most positive thoughts, which is a surprise. Gallup also studies well-being, using various leading factors, and hardly any country exists where 30 percent or more of the population is "thriving," Gallup's highest measure of well-being. A sharp drop in well-being occurred in Tunisia, Egypt, and Libya just prior to the turmoil of the Arab Spring.

Among psychotherapists, happiness is generally viewed pessimistically. Some estimates from therapists indicate that up to 50 percent of the population exhibit signs of mental illness, including anxiety and depression. Suicide rates among white males rose by 40 percent recently, which is generally attributed to the economic downturn, and it's no secret that antidepressants and tranquilizers are a multi-billion dollar market, even though neither class of medications actually cures anxiety and depression.

Against these conflicting reports, some commentators assert that we stumble into happiness here and there, while our dream of being constantly happy is self-delusion. People are bad at knowing what will make them happy, we are told. Things like getting married, having a baby, winning the lottery, or even having a high salary don't bring the happiness that we assume, as a society, they will. Mothers of young children report, for example, that taking care of infants and toddlers is one of the biggest stressors in their lives, while lottery winners typically say, a few years after their windfall, that they were happier before they won.

Why are we so bad at being happy? Were we born to struggle? These are questions that have fueled centuries of philosophy and spirituality, with no reliable conclusion. Since the 1960s, the rise of the New Age amounts to a search for a higher reality that promises more happiness than organized religion does. Has the promise come true for dedicated seekers? We'll see. In a way it's depressing that the most famous soliloquy in Shakespeare is about suicide ("to be or not to be, that is the question"). Now that I've laid out the contradictions that are involved, the next few posts will explore in depth how happiness works and where the pursuit of happiness should be leading us.



Although the pursuit of happiness is so natural that it was written into the Declaration of Independence, modern psychology has turned doubtful about it. In the previous post I listed a few reasons why even the field known as positive psychology holds that being happy all the time is basically unrealistic. We tend to have accidental bouts of happiness that come and go beyond our control. Therefore, some researchers have concluded that the best a person can do is to achieve a general state of contentment, not a state of continual happiness (I'm not sure the two are very different, however).

Is it right to be doubtful of your prospects for a happy life? The counter argument would claim that humans are designed to be happy, until something goes wrong. The things that can go wrong are many -- stress, personal disasters, thwarted desires, and bad luck come to mind. Then there are the various spiritual strains that promise us grace, God's love, and divine protection. These have had a powerful effect on humankind even at the worst of times, when the lot of the average person included disease, want, poverty, and oppression. Is God's love a fantasy to compensate for all these causes of suffering?

Our doubts about happiness can't be answered abstractly. The best theory can't make you happy; you have to test it. This testing requires choices, and choices are limited. If you stand back, most people live their lives according to a set of beliefs, and over the years they manifest what they expect out of life. (That's why so many highly successful people were raised by loving, supportive mothers who told them how wonderful they were. If you go through life with such positive expectations, your choices are likely to be self-affirming rather than self-defeating.) The importance of choice tells us something important right off the bat. There is no such thing as a passive road to happiness. Even if humans are designed to be happy, they must activate the possibility rather than wait for the design to unfold on its own.

Despite the fad for viewing happiness as accidental, it's more productive to test for yourself the kind of decisions that promote happiness. What should you do to make yourself happy right this minute? The array of possibilities is quite wide.

Avoid stressors that are avoidable.
Fix problems immediately -- don't procrastinate.
Bond with people you care about.
Do things that are meaningful to you.
Give your brain positive input. Avoid needless negativity.
Address the signs of depression and anxiety.
Assert control over your life. Don't be dependent on others or dominated by them.
Be of service.
Walk away from situations you can't improve.
Find a source of genuine fulfillment.
Don't do things you know to be wrong.
Speak your own truth.
Express appreciation and affection toward others. 
Find something that inspires you. Don't waste time on distractions.
Allow time for play.
Leave room for down time.
Set aside a fixed time for reflection and meditation.
Focus on long-term pleasures, like planning a vacation, rather than short-term gratification.

Notice that nothing on this list is a matter of faith, religion, or spiritual aspiration. No one is appealing to perfect love, understanding, or compassion. Happiness doesn't await a tremendous kind of personal transformation. Instead, these are practical choices that are well documented to improve a person's happiness. One finding from positive psychology that's actually positive is this: To make a happy life, make your day happy. Immediate decisions matter the most.

You might cast a skeptical eye at the things I've listed, believing that this is nothing but a laundry list that is too long to be useful. But let me suggest otherwise. Most people are unhappy because they ignored the items on the list. They allowed too much stress to enter their lives, or they refused to walk away from impossible situations, or they allowed themselves to become dependent on somebody else, just to give a few leading examples. The other lesson from this list is that living unconsciously doesn't bring happiness -- each item asks for focus and awareness. What you aren't conscious of, you can't change.

So before you lament that life is unfair or that only a select few are born to be happy, consider every item on the list as it applies to you today, right this minute. Set aside your beliefs about ultimate happiness and focus instead of today's happiness. It's also useful to itemize the things that are almost guaranteed to create unhappiness.

Putting up with unnecessary stress.
Denying that a problem exists and putting off its solution.
Isolating yourself, not interacting with people you care about.
Engaging in routine or meaningless work.
Exposing yourself to needless negativity and negative people in general.
Feeling depressed or anxious and simply putting up with it.
Allowing someone else to dominate you, make decisions for you, or exerting too much control.
Acting selfish, offering little or nothing to others.
Stubbornly enduring an impossible situation.
Putting your own fulfillment on hold.
Doing things you know to be wrong.
Going along to get along, not upholding your own values.
Forgetting to express how much you appreciate and value others. 
Wasting time on distractions.
Treating everything as work, duty, or obligation.
Leaving no room for down time.
Allowing yourself no time to reflect and meditate.
Focusing on short-term gratification.

Many will be tempted to protest that two laundry lists are worse than one. Both are unrealistic. In fact, you have enough time in the day to do everything on the positive list and avoid everything on the negative list. What you need isn't enough hours in the day. You need to value self-awareness. Once you want to be more aware, the intention to create happiness becomes realistic -- you are motivated to be the author of our own fulfillment. It's amazing how many people don't value their happiness enough to pay attention to it. Once you do, you will discover for yourself if lifelong happiness is feasible or not. It won't be a matter of theory or delayed gratification.

In the next post we will get at the deeper issue of whether human beings are designed to be happy, a question central to every strain of religion, spirituality, and depth psychology.



As science has steadily undermined the long-held beliefs of religion, almost all that remains for people of faith is to say that God is a mystery and will always be one. Insofar as Einstein was religious, he possessed a feeling of awe and wonder at the mystery of the universe. But science hasn't stopped chipping away at mystery, promising to reduce spiritual experience to measurable brain activity. I doubt that belief in God, the soul, heaven and hell, and other tenets of faith will be drastically affected -- polls continue to show that these things remain articles of belief for around 80-90 percent of responders.

Will neuroscience eventually be able to locate God in our neurons, and if so, should that tiny area of the brain be excised or boosted? No doubt there are arguments on both sides, depending on whether you hold that God has been good for the human race in the long run or bad. Setting aside such judgments, it turns out that the possibility of finding God in the brain creates a baffling mystery that neither religion nor science can tackle alone.

Now that advanced brain scanning can map the way our brains light up with each thought, word, or action, it's clear that no experience escapes the brain. For a mystic to see God or feel his presence, for St. Paul to be suddenly converted on the road to Damascus, or for St. Teresa of Avila to have her heart pierced by an angelic arrow, such experiences would have to register in their brains. Yet this indisputable fact (so far as present knowledge extends) doesn't give science the advantage over religion. For it turns out that the brain has definite limitations on what it can experience.

The work of the late Polish-American mathematician Alfred Korzybski (1879-1950) is relevant here, because Korzybski worked out the layered processing that goes into the everyday processing of reality. Billions of bits of data bombard our sense organs, of which only a fraction enter the nervous system. Of that fraction, more is filtered out by the brain, which uses built-in models of reality to filter out what doesn't fit. When people say, "You're not hearing me" or, "You only see what you want to see," they are expressing a truth that Korzybski tried to quantify mathematically.

Sometimes the things a person sees are simply outside the range of human experience, like our inability to see ultraviolet light. But a great deal more depends on expectations, memories, biases, fears, and simple close-mindedness. If you go to a party, and someone tells you that you are about to meet a Nobel Prize winner, you will see a different person than if you had been told he is a reformed Mafia hit man. When all the filtering and processing is complete, there is no doubt that the brain doesn't actually experience reality but only a confirmation of its model of reality.

Two interesting points follow:

1. All models are equal as viewed from the level of the brain.
2. Reality transcends any model we can possibly make of it.

These two points allow God, the soul, and all other spiritual experiences back into the picture. The first point demolishes the notion that science is superior to religion because it gathers facts while religion deals in beliefs. In truth, science filters out and discards a huge portion of human experience -- almost everything one would classify as subjective -- so its model is just as selective, if not more so, than religion's. As far as the brain is concerned, neural filtering is taking place in all models, whether they are scientific, spiritual, artistic, or psychotic. The brain is a processor of inputs, not a mirror to realty.

The second point is even more telling. If our brains are constantly filtering every experience, there is no way anyone can claim to know what is "really" real. You can't step outside your brain to fathom what lies beyond it. Just as there is a horizon for the farthest objects that emit light in the cosmos, and a farthest horizon for how far back in time astronomy can probe, there is a farthest horizon for thinking. The brain operates in time and space, having linear thoughts that are the end point of a selective filtering process. So whatever is outside time and space is inconceivable, and unfiltered reality would probably blow the brain's circuits, or simply be blanked out.

Korzybski held that even mathematics was a model, subject to the limitations of all models that the brain constructs. Not everyone would agree -- holding on to mathematics as a universal truth gives advanced physics its toehold on the quantum world. But I am not using any of these ideas as bludgeons to bash science. All agendas aside, Korzybski simply pointed out, using the language of mathematics, that whatever reality is, it transcends the brain.

In that single word -- transcendence -- there's a level playing field between science and religion. Reality transcends, or goes beyond, what the brain discerns. If something supernatural springs from the transcendent, materialists and skeptics may argue that it can't be real. Actually, there's no way to prove that a natural experience is real. Seeing angels and seeing a tree, mountain, or cloud are equally inexplicable.



When someone asks, "Where is the mind located?" most people will automatically point to their heads. Why? Is it because we experience our thoughts in our heads? That seems the case most of the time, though when dreaming, one could argue that it gets a bit more ambiguous since we feel that we are "inside" our dreams. But for most of us, most of the time, "my head" is where "my mind" is located.

However, this may simply be because so many sense organs are located there: eyes, ears, nose, tongue. With so much information flowing into one part of the body, it might merely be habit that gives us the sense that the mind is in our head. (For example, you feel your ears sitting on either side of your face, but when a car backfires behind you, the sound can't be felt entering the ear canal, being processed in the inner ear and then in the brain's auditory center. Quite clearly the sound of the car comes from behind you. One could say, conversely, that hearing shoots out from the head into the world. This in fact was the view of some ancient cultures. We casually use this model for vision when we say that someone "shoots a glance" at someone else.)

Babies, we are told, have a much more diffuse experience of the senses, perhaps mixing them up in what are called synesthesias (e.g. experiencing sounds as colors or tastes as shapes, an experience reported from hallucinogenic drugs and in deep meditative states). Some researchers contend that babies have a poor sense of the boundary between themselves and the world. But infants turn into toddlers, and the separation between self and other starts to harden, as does the habitual experience that "my head is where I think." Society and family reinforce this habit as the toddler grows up, and eventually the mind takes its seat in our heads, or so it seems.

This dovetails nicely with another cultural consensus that our minds are in our brains. Mind and brain have taken up residence together in a box called the skull. In this series of posts, however, we ask that you set aside your habits and assumptions to consider quite literally "thinking outside the box," a process that goes on outside the skull but is still mental. Is the brain actually so closed up in its box that it makes sense to speak of it as though it were a machine for making mind, the way a laser printer makes documents? Is it possible that one could have a fully functioning and thinking brain sitting in a pan on a lab bench as in some 1950's science fiction movie? (Successful head transplants have been performed in laboratory animals, but since there is no technique for reattaching the spinal cord, the animal was left a quadriplegic. Such procedures are controversial, for obvious ethical and humane reasons.) We should be open to asking some culturally radical questions, including the most radical of all: Is a brain even necessary for "thinking"? There are different ways to explore these issues.

First, let's consider whether only human brains create minds. Few people who have pets or live on farms or go camping would say that the animals they encounter don't have minds. (This view accords with abundant evidence that the genes, receptors, and neurotransmitters involved in human brain function are present in animals.) Again, if we are asked, "Where is your cat's mind?" we'd point at its head (unlike an ancient Egyptian, Greek or Roman, who would point to the heart, as he would for himself). Saying that different kinds of animal brains create minds is not so troublesome. We aren't able to describe what those minds are like (some may lack anything like human self-awareness), but we shouldn't have a problem conceiving that these creatures at least have one.

Evolutionarily, nervous systems are not always central. Some creatures, like jellyfish, have neuronal nets distributed throughout the body. While humans do possess a central nervous system, we also have other, more distributed nervous systems as well. We have a peripheral nervous system, which includes nerves that gather information for the brain (e.g. the nerves in our sense organs) and nerves that send signals from the brain (e.g. telling our muscles what to do).

After it was observed that the gastrointestinal tract could function quite well when severed from the peripheral nervous system, it was concluded that this constitutes a weblike enteric nervous system.

What makes this a separate nervous system is that there are specialized ganglion cells that are located between muscle layers in the intestinal wall which act like a local brain. If one severs any nerves which contact them (from the brain, by way of the peripheral nervous system), these ganglion cells continue to instruct the intestine to move and absorb and secrete, working quite well and quite autonomously as a self-contained functional unit.
It turns out that the intestinal tract only takes advice from the rest of the body. It harbors its own reactions. When bad news gives you a sinking feeling in the pit of your stomach, you are experiencing an emotion as surely as you experience it in your head. In fact, your gut reaction precedes the thought, "Oh no!" Did the enteric nervous system create such a sensation on its own? That's unclear, but it's tempting to think so. Certainly many people trust their gut reactions over the confused and compromised responses that the brain is often saddled with when over-thinking sets in.

The muscles of your face are directly linked to your brain. While we assume that the brain is telling the mouth and lips to smile when we're feeling happy, the reverse is also true. Seeing a smile on someone else's face can make you happy, and children are taught to smile as a way to break out of a sad mood. Whether this works or not varies from person to person, but it could be argued that the face is controlling the brain in those instances.

Findings about brain-like processes outside the skull have become common. The conduction system of the heart, which organizes your heartbeat, can be thought of as the heart's brain in the same way the ganglion cells in the gut are the brain of the intestines. The independence of the conduction system is shown when a transplanted heart keeps beating even though the nerves that connected it to the donor's central and peripheral nervous systems have been severed. The interaction between the heart's independent processing and the brain's is complex and not fully understood. Still more mysterious are the bacteria that outnumber the body's cells by ten to one, living mostly inside the digestive tract but also in the brain and other organs. We think of these as invaders, but over eons bacteria have been incorporated into vast stretches along the double helix of human DNA. The implications for what we call "being human" are enormous and largely uncharted.

We think we've established that cultural assumptions about mind and brain are full of gaps. The location of mind is in doubt, and any attempt to isolate it physically in the skull run into valid objections. In the next post we'll pursue more of the fascinating possibilities that arise when thinking literally gets out of the box.



Thinking outside the box has become such a clich that it tends to be meaningless. Advertisers want to convince us that eating granola instead of Wheaties or buying skinny jeans or switching to an electric razor is thinking outside the box. What's actually radical is to see that we are thinking outside the box in every moment, if the box in question is the skull.

In the first post of this series we offered abundant research findings to show that "thinking" takes place in the intestinal tract, the heart, and elsewhere in the body. Thus the brain, commonly taken as the undisputed locale of the mind, is scientifically and medically acknowledged to be sharing its powers. More and more it looks as if every organ is the locale of its own version of mind. The ongoing discovery of self-contained networks of nerves in various organs is backed up by finding the ganglion cells that act like their own local brain support. In sum, there's high-level nervous system activity distributed throughout the body, some of it feeding into the brain's networks, some of it receiving outputs from the brain, and some of it functioning quite well without the brain at all.

Thinking is happening, in some guise or other, everywhere in your body all the time. This emerging view has the potential to rock our accepted understanding of mind itself. The brain looks more and more like an outcropping in a landscape that is permeated with varied forms of intelligence. Let's explore the implications of this new model.

To begin, the immune system has been labeled a "floating brain." In a very tangible way, your immune cells "decide" whether an invading substance is friend or foe, and if they decide wrong, you develop an allergy to harmless things -- house dust, pollen, cat dander -- that pose no danger and never needed to be repelled. Ask any allergy sufferer whether their allergy affects their thinking. The dullness, lack of energy, and depleted enthusiasm that many allergy sufferers experience leaves little doubt about how the immune system is part of a larger structure.

In the old model, nerves were like the wiring that brings electricity to every part of a house. But it's not just the "wiring" of nerves that links brain to body. Hormones produced by all sorts of organs affect the way the brain works and how you experience your mind. Consider the mood changes experienced by many women around their menstrual period and menopause. Many mental events are triggered in similar ways. Ever feel sleepy after you've had too much birthday cake? Ever feel addled after you're thrown accidentally from your bike? Hormones (such as estrogen, insulin, and cortisol) produced in response to internal and external factors, travel to the brain via the bloodstream, and then have profound effects on the nature of "your mind." It's not only the brain, then, that is creating your mind.

Looking at the brain itself reveals greater complexity to the mind-brain relationship. While people generally think of neurons as the particular brain cells that produce the mind (acting together in almost infinitely complex networks), there are other cells in the brain without which the neurons could not do their jobs -- the glial cells, for example, which outnumber neurons and serve many essential tasks: conveying nutrients and oxygen to neurons, creating the myelin sheathes around the long axons of neurons to facilitate speedy signal transmission in some areas, stabilizing connections between neurons, cleaning up cellular debris from aging or injured cells. Indeed, while we conventionally think of glial cells as the servants of neurons, the truth is that neuroscience still knows very little about all the roles they play.

These cells themselves are not necessarily "of the brain." Neurons mostly (though not always) derive from other resident cells, such as stem cells, in the brain, but some neurons and many glial cells arrive in the brain via the circulatory system -- they are like nomads who eventually find a place to live permanently. Questions abound about how much this happens, by what mechanism for each cell type, and in which different regions of the brain it is taking place. All these questions are still being debated. (The production of some brain cells might happen by circulating stem cells that directly become neurons and glial cells, or by fusing with pre-existing cells.) It's clear, however, that cells are trafficking between the body and the brain all the time.

The skull is not an impermeable barrier, nor is the famous "blood-brain barrier" that served to keep the brain in splendid chemical isolation. So the boundaries between brain and not-brain in the body are not clear cut. The brain is permeable to the rest of the body, signals streaming in and out, including from electrical connections by nerves, signaling molecules such as hormones, and cells trafficking in and out. In fact, there is no brain without the body and therefore no mind without the body, either.

To say the brain creates the mind is at best incomplete. In a simple analogy, every automobile needs an engine in order to run. But an engine by itself goes nowhere. Conversely, without an engine, a car body and wheels go nowhere. The functions that make a car a car require every part acting in concert. Likewise, the functions that our dynamic minds carry out are created by the body-brain complex, not by the brain alone. The brain has always been out of the box; it's just been waiting for science to catch up.

These issues are culturally complicated because of unspoken rules about what is legitimate in science and what isn't. Many of the experiences that people relate where the mind does not stay put in its box are often labeled as unscientific, if not illusions, hoaxes or superstitions. For any number of scientists and philosophers so-called out-of-body experiences (such as the now famous reports of a near-death experience) are considered off-limits, with automatic denigration of research that might validate them. Indeed, this is part of what makes the field of consciousness studies so controversial in the first place -- it flouts some of science's iron-clad assumptions.

Other, more common experiences, however, are not off-limits. Such diverse things as depression, love, dreaming, and remembering are being "explained" by examining brain activity through new forms of brain imaging. Even some uncommon, very exceptional experiences are also permitted for study: the feeling of "being in the zone" reported by high-performance athletes, for example. But no one argues that the study of this experience is unscientific or based on magical thinking just because it only happens in highly trained athletes. Similarly, when the mind doesn't stay put in its box, this deserves to be investigated if only because, to begin with, everything human is worth investigating.

One final interesting fact, for now, to help us think outside the box: It relates to the electrical activity of the heart. It's true that the pacemaker cells of the heart are modulated by the brain. Yet as doctors know, some patients with little brain function can still have reliable heartbeats. The pacemaker cells of the heart, in its conduction system, are the heart's own little brain, as we've already discussed. Your heart, being an electrical organ, also creates an electromagnetic field -- the strongest of any tissue in the body -- and its pattern of beats is responsive to other electromagnetic fields, even those outside the body. Here's the fascinatingly evocative part: The strength of the field created by one heart appears to be strong enough to influence another person's heart when they draw near to each other. Then the nervous systems of these two hearts perceive and respond to each other. Does love have its own physiology, shared by two "thinking" hearts?

So, where does the mind come from? Just from your brain or across the wider landscape of the brain-body complex? Even that expanded definition of mind must expand further; for the body is just another box that thinking is eager to go beyond, as when two lovers match their heartbeats. A loving parent consoling a child with a hug or a spouse sleeping soundly next to you night after night, year after year, is expanding the mind.

We hope we have begun to break down the walls around your own thinking so that you can imagine other cogent and, yes, scientific possibilities for explaining the nature of mind other than simply the brain as a computer doing what computers do. In Part Three we will discuss situations where people have repeatedly described their minds going outside the box of their skulls -- and even beyond their skins -- using examples from deep meditation and elsewhere that science should explore with fresh eyes and not consign to some unscientific Siberia.



In the prior posts of this series we have described ways in which the brain does not, in fact cannot, produce the mind on its own. The possibility of a 1950s science fiction scenario where a working brain can produce an intact mind while sitting in a jar is impossible. The brain is intimately connected to the body through nerves, travelling cells, circulating biomolecules, and electrical activity.

A brain severed from the body, even if it would produce some form of mind, would produce one that is very different from what we have in the brain-body complex. (Even in traditional scientific views brain and body form a single system as they evolved together over time.)

In this post we will momentarily turn away from these physical considerations to look at some reports of mind outside the brain. We will return to physical structures later to show that mind not only exists outside the box of the skull but the box of the body itself. Though seemingly limited by its covering of skin, your body is incomplete as an enclosed location for mind.

Mainstream science is reluctant, if not dismissive, when faced with the notion of mind outside the brain. Many of the examples we will be offering derive from first-hand reports from contemplative practitioners (of meditation, yoga, Zen Buddhism, etc.) -- in other words, people who have spent as much time training their minds as world-class athletes have spent training their bodies (though, to be precise, in both cases it is body and mind that's being trained, just for different tasks).

Actually, getting your mind to move outside your head is relatively easy. If you burn your hand on the stove, your attention immediately rushes there. The heartache of unrequited love takes one's attention to the center of the chest. In various spiritual traditions this kind of "moving mind" becomes a conscious skill. Here's a common introductory example of "mind outside the box" from Zen practice. Students who have taken on a disciplined daily Zen meditation practice -- usually counting or following the breath -- are then advised to move their minds into the hara. The hara is the second chakra, located below the navel, just in front of the sacrum. One way to describe this to students is to imagine that their mind is located in a drop of honey in the center of the skull (where we usually experience our mind anyway), and then to let the drop of honey slowly descend down along the front of the spine until it finally reaches the hara.

This exercise takes time and a great deal of practice. Initially it can feel as if there's only a little movement, because your focus of attention snaps back into the skull like a rubber band. And so you begin again, letting the drop of honey slowly descend, bringing your mind with it. Why? One reason is that when your mind moves from inside your skull into a position in front of the sacrum, it can bring a jolt of energy, not unlike the way coffee suddenly energizes your mind a few minutes after downing your morning cup. What might otherwise have been sleepy Zen suddenly becomes awake Zen.

More importantly, there is an exquisite sense of stability in your mind when brought to that location: Thoughts still come and go, but they take on a sense of waves coming and going, or clouds passing overhead, rather than being like a monkey bouncing all over the room. A mind running around in the space of uncontrolled thoughts makes us tired, but it also disguises the potential for having a silent, strong, still mind.

Neuroscience would do well to consider these subjective states in physiological terms. If, as we now know, the "bodily brain" is divided among the major organs, with neurons acting inside the heart, liver, and intestinal tract, it's plausible to suppose that each center of intelligence has its own mode of "thinking," with the brain predominating because we are so used to thoughts being verbal. We don't hear a voice in our liver, only in our heads (and for some people, in their hearts).

But this doesn't make nonverbal thinking inferior -- far from it. The conscious mind can't run the liver, heart, or intestinal tract but depends on their self-reliance to an enormous extent. For instance, one could consider the chakras described in Yoga -- subtle centers of energy and awareness located up and down the spinal column and on top of the skull -- as theoretical models of nonverbal mind. This sensing of energy centers cannot be proven scientifically, perhaps, but neither can pain, pleasure, love, ecstasy, and other subjective experiences that exist in the first place because people feel them (see below). In the same vein, various Eastern spiritual practices accomplish what we cannot, taking consciousness out of the brain to do work elsewhere.

In Eastern traditions the purpose of subjective states is to be useful, to aid inner work. What kind of work? The ancient texts give various answers. There is control of the involuntary nervous system, as demonstrated by the extraordinary feats of yogis and swamis who can consciously slow down their breathing and heart rate. There is balance, achieving conscious control over homeostatic mechanism and thus promoting health. There is the pursuit of enlightenment -- a vast area beyond the scope of this post -- and also the same curiosity to explore nature (in this case, inner nature) that drives mainstream science in the realm of materialism.

The fact is that Zen students and practitioners in other traditions routinely move their minds out of their heads. The experience has been replicated for centuries; it isn't accidental, haphazard or hallucinatory. Having learned how to do it, you discover by playing around with the practice that you can move your mind into your little toe, your shoulder, your elbow, perhaps even across the room. The immediate reflex of most neuroscientists is that such a subjective sense of "moving mind" is the result of neuronal activity, and even if we cannot quantify such subtle and intricate activity today, we will one day be able to as our tools evolve.

The best rejoinder to this claim is that a whole host of subjective experiences in the domain of medicine are self-reported and cannot be measured without asking the patient what's going on. Statements like "I feel a bad pain here," "I'm depressed," "I'm confused," and "I've lost my balance" can sometimes be traced to distorted brain activity on an fMRI scan, but only the patient can relate what is actually happening. The brain scan can't tell someone he's in pain when he says he isn't. To say "I see my fourth chakra" isn't less valid; it just has far less brain research devoted to it. (When a bacterium avoids a toxin in a petri dish or is attracted to food, can we claim to know that it is not feeling some primitive form of repulsion or desire?)

The Zen practice of placing the mind in the hara is only a minor example, a step along the way to deeper, more profound experiences. There comes a time in nearly all contemplative traditions when one's sense of mind and even the ordinary self changes fundamentally, for a moment or a lifetime. In Vedic and Buddhist traditions these experiences are called forms of Samadhi, where a connection is made with pure awareness at the deepest level. In Hebrew mystical practice this might be understood as D'vekut, in Christian practice, Cleaving to God. The thinking mind is left behind, and one arrives at consciousness without content.

Here we've reached the shadow zone where "my mind" dissolves into mind itself. In this zone reality shifts dramatically. Instead of sitting inside the space of a room, the person sits inside mental space (Chit Akash in Sanskrit). Events that take place are not strictly mental, however. The inner voyager witnesses time, space, matter, and energy being born here. If such an experience is valid, the implications for physics -- and for everyday life -- are immense. Consciousness is no longer the elephant in the room, the thing science prefers not to talk about. It becomes the only thing to talk about if you want to know where reality comes from. Starting with the undeniable fact that the brain shares mind with the rest of the body, we are on the verge of showing that mind must be shared with everything in existence -- going outside the box extends to infinity, a possibility we will unfold as this series continues.



In the previous posts we began with the common-sense notion that the brain produces the mind and proceeded to explode it. Using medical facts we showed that every part of the body shares in the process we call "thinking," although the liver, intestines, and heart do their thinking nonverbally. They still make decisions, show preferences, exhibit self-reliance, and contribute in major ways to the information sent to the brain.

We have offered our proof that mind exists outside the skull without departing from common sense. In the same vein, we explored the possibility that mind exists outside the brain. Many scientists would dismiss the possibility out of hand, but we showed that the inner experience of Eastern contemplative practices (meditation, yoga, Zen Buddhism, et al) are not inferior to the data collected on subjective states like pain, feeling happy, or falling in love. Brain scans offer correlates to these experiences, but it is self-report from a person who says "I'm in pain" or "I feel happy" that must be relied upon. Similarly, subjective reports of a spiritual kind cannot be invalidated unless at the same time you are willing to throw out pain, happiness, love, and all other subjective states.

But our goal isn't spiritual or religious. We aren't after God but after mind (even if, on the cosmic scale, they might turn out to be the same). The deepest experiences of yogis, swamis, ancient rishis, and Buddhist masters tell the story of mind everywhere in Nature; mind indeed is the source of existence itself. It can't be denied that reality only comes to us through subjective experience. Sir Alexander Fleming examining penicillium mold through his microscope was having a subjective experience. If there were phenomena occurring all around him that the human mind can't experience, think about, or sense, they don't belong to reality as we know it.

As someone having a "real" experience, Fleming and a Buddhist master exist on the same plane. The only difference is that science focuses on experience "out there" while contemplative practices focus on events "in here." A caution before we describe these deeper inner experiences. Whether they are described as an encounter with God (e.g., Judaism, Christianity, Islam), the higher self (e.g. in the monistic systems of Vedanta and Hinduism, Shaivism), or with no divine essence at all (e.g., the Absolute in Buddhism) depends on descriptive language and the past conditioning of the practitioner. The descriptive, often poetic words are culturally determined; they serve as verbal devices for grasping a nonverbal experience so that it can be reported to others, usually within the same spiritual, cultural context.

But no description can be the experience itself. There is no attempt here, as many skeptics accuse, to mystify or cloud something suspiciously immaterial and vague, perhaps outright false. If either religion or its absence makes you nervous, don't get hung up on terminology. Pay attention to the reports of the experiences themselves as a universal phenomenon, born of the mind's very nature, which is self-awareness.

When "thinking outside the box" calls forth such profound, often life-changing responses in the practitioner, the sensed boundaries of the body disappear. No longer does the skin form a barrier, however permeable, between inside and outside, between self and other. Now, when you feel your breath move in and out, it is the universe that you feel is breathing -- indeed, the universe is breathing you. When a bell rings in the meditation hall or a car horn honks on the city streets outside or a bird sings in a nearby tree, the ring, the honk, and the song are your own, palpably arising from within yourself.

While such experiences are uncommon in everyday life, they are not rare in this special setting. Even if they are most actively cultivated in spiritual contexts, you can ask athletes about being "in the zone," artists about feeling inspired, scientists about the moment of discovery, craftsmen about their intimacy with what is brought forth in their craft -- they will all describe similar states of merging where there's no distinction between what's going on "in here" and "out there," because those boundaries have dissolved.

For some people such experiences are not trained and nurtured but happen spontaneously. They may occur during a so-called peak experience or in the extremity of being near death. For others the experience arrives for no detectable reason, and yet without such an experience, could Walt Whitman have written a line like this from "Song of Myself": "I am large, I contain multitudes." His Leaves of Grass is almost entirely a report of moving in the world with an enlarged, even unbounded sense of self, where the division between self and other is experienced as illusion. Here is evidence of mind permeating the world, irrespective of the boundary of the skull or the skin.

And then there's the experience of "dropping away of body and mind" described by the Japanese Zen patriarch Dogen; the "mind of clear light" described by Tantric teachers; the experience of lower self realizing that it is essentially the higher self, reported by ancient and contemporary Indian sages (rishis); and the Ein Sof -- the infinite God beyond our capacity to describe, from which arises all creation -- of Jewish mystics. Every tradition speaks about the experience of a Mind that is greater than our own minds, out of which our own minds arise like waves on the ocean. This Mind is beyond all boundaries, something in which we share with all beings and from which all beings arise. This Mind is the place in which there is no suffering. It is pure awareness with no object of awareness except itself. Reaching for words, the world's spiritual guides teach that pure awareness is infinite, blissful, illuminated from within.

Despite the fact that cultures have institutionalized the universal Mind with terms long accepted as true (e.g., God, Brahman, the Absolute), words aren't very helpful to someone who hasn't yet had the experience. If the unreliability of subjective reports puts off many scientists, the claim that some people have special experiences that go beyond words bolsters their skepticism. As a result, formulating a science of consciousness has been slow to start and even slower to gain credibility.

A personal disclosure: The authors include some contemplative practitioners with a varying depth of experience in the traditions of Buddhism, Vedanta, and Kashmir Shaivism. This doesn't mean that our personal experiences are "true," only that these topics are not hypothetical for us. Aligning with centuries of contemplative practitioners, we find the reports of expanded awareness compelling, but being physicians and scientists, we also think of such experiences as material for hypothesis-making and testing through experimentation.

Alas, other scientists hotly disagree, saying, "No, this is not a fit topic for scientific exploration -- your evidence is born of hearsay and superstition." To those who draw a boundary around what is worth exploring scientifically and what is not, we ask, "Isn't this just another form of unthinking fundamentalism, akin to that of religious fundamentalists whom many rational scientists claim to abhor?" The Roman poet Terence wrote, Homo sum: humani nil a me alienum puto (I am human, I consider nothing human alien to me). Consider all the forbidden topics, from female sexuality to epidemics, from madness to gross anatomy, that were once placed under a ban. These meditation experiences are human experiences, like every other human experience that scientists deem worthy of investigation by techniques such as putting people inside an MRI machine: experiences like depression, memory, love, fear, excitement, orgasm.

The trend is now moving away from the naysayers. Research is starting to account for the swing between the inner and outer world, a swing we all experience every day, using as subjects adept meditation practitioners in Tibetan Buddhism. These meditators report experiences in which the sense of inside/outside and self/other dissolves. Instead of dismissing this as mysticism, one hypothesis now suggests specific neural activity within two complementary signaling networks in the brain -- one is active when you are dealing with the world outside the body (called task positive network), the other, the "default network" (or task negative network) revs up when your focus is inward as commonly happens in wakeful rest, introspection, or from lack of significant sensory inputs).

Our brains are thought to alternate rapidly between these two networks, but when deep, "non-dual" meditation is performed, they both activate together, because inside and outside are no longer opposite and contrary, but are experienced as a seamless mind contemplating a seamless whole. We don't mean to suggest the default mode network is the basis for the mind (since default mode activity is also seen in primates and rats), but the data illustrates how mental states like meditation affect the brain.

Short of proving with scientific rigor that the mind is not located just in the brain, we have pointed to the fact that the experience of your mind in your head is not the only experience you can have. Exploring the implications for yourself only takes a few moments a day -- you can feel for yourself how your thinking does not have to remain locked up in the box of your skull.

Finally, the aura of religion is so strong that skeptics dismiss all spiritual experience -- being alien to materialism -- as matters of faith. Faith, in a great many varieties, is something we all turn to for interpreting our experiences. From the perspective of quantum mechanics, which has shown beyond a doubt that solid objects are not solid, it takes faith to believe that the physical world exists -- certainly a rationalist must admit that the five senses are lying or at best are unreliable.

In everyday life, faith is part of the equation. But it is not only great faith that drives spiritual investigations but also, as is said in Zen, "great doubt" -- doubt as to the meaning of existence and the reason for suffering in the world. The great faith in this equation is what makes the great doubt bearable. This balance between what we know and what we hope to discover drives science as well as spirituality. The difference lies in which tool of investigation is used.

The mind studying the mind reveals aspects of reality that can't be reached by investigating the physical world. The reach of consciousness becomes even greater once we realize that the mind isn't locked in the skull or even bounded by the skin. Step by step, the findings of mainstream science have opened the domain of Mind, that transcends our individual minds and is fundamental to the universe.

In the next posts we'll return to what contemporary science understands about the most fundamental structures in nature -- our aim is to find a meeting place between the inner and outer method of investigation. Have we made you curious? We hope so, because curiosity is the theme to be taken up next.



The title of this series of posts is both a declaration (the mind is not contained exclusively within the brain) and an invitation -- to think creatively about the nature of your mind. You no longer have to imprison your mind inside your skull, or anywhere else in the body, in fact. There are other ways to imagine and experience it. We've provided many clues that mind extends outside the body, which implies that your own mind, as you experience it, may exist without boundaries. As we demonstrated, contemplative practitioners in many traditions point to experiences of mind that extend beyond the body, to encompass the universe as a whole.

Your brain doesn't determine your mind. Brain and mind are recreating each other with every act of perception. Moreover, with training, you can learn to experience your mind in parts of your body beyond the enclosure inside your skull, perhaps experiencing it even as filling your body. We've been offering factual evidence to avoid the trap of metaphysics or unfounded speculation, since science so deeply distrusts metaphysics. Has the evidence made you curious about what your mind really is? There's a huge difference between two pictures of reality. One picture describes a clockwork brain that evolved mechanistically from a random universe. The other describes a conscious universe where one expression is the human mind.

If you accept the second story -- as we do -- it leads to a mind-blowing conclusion: The universe is thinking, feeling, and acting through you. You exist so that the universe has a new outlet for knowing itself. (Surely this makes you curious!) As was said by the Sufi master Hazrat Inayat Khan, "The Sufi says this whole universe was made in order that God might know Himself. The seed wished to realize what it is, what is in it, and therefore became the tree."

If you and I are embedded in a conscious universe, a leap toward freedom can be made. Unfortunately, most people use their brains in a habitual way. Day in and day out, the brain repeats the same patterns of habitual ideas (someone once estimated that 90 percent of the thoughts we have today are repetitions of the thoughts we had yesterday). Habitual ideas are imprinted in you by prevailing cultural assumptions, including those that derive from science and its purely materialist view of the world. If you are a materialist, the universe couldn't possibly be thinking (not that this notion bothers the universe -- it has time to wait until a better belief system comes along).

We do not seek to convince you of anything in these posts but to stir up the urge to seek your own answers. For example, do you accept that your mind works like a computer, which would make the brain a kind of biological hardware (what one expert in artificial intelligence dubbed "a computer made of meat")? The brain-as-computer idea can be exploded by asking, has a computer ever been curious? Has a computer ever been in love? Has it ever had urges or given into temptation? These aspects of mind are innate in human beings and are not computational.

Now that you are thinking outside the (skull) box, what if we can expand your sense of self beyond your skin? When you say "my body," you probably mean this body made of approximately 4 trillion human cells, each of which contains your genes. But is that really your body? On close inspection, your body is lined, over the surface of the skin and throughout the digestive tract by 100 times as many cells, if not more, that aren't "yours" at all, in that they do not contain your ancestral genes. They are microbial cells, part of what scientists now refer to as the microbiome -- your second genome, so to speak. These include both bacteria and other single-celled creatures known as archaea. You are, in essence, composed of colonies of human and non-human cells living in harmonious balance.

Outnumbering "your" cells by a hundred to, these micro-organisms aren't just passive riders or conveyers of disease. Quite the contrary -- these trillions of bacteria convey your health. For example, if we grow mice in an "abiotic" environment in which there are no bacteria (or if we have a boy who has to be raised in a bubble because he has a rare disorder, Severe Combined Immunodeficiency syndrome, and cannot control infections), the digestive tract can't function properly. The microscopic, finger-like projections, or microvilli, that line the intestinal wall don't form. Without them, you don't have enough gut surface area to accomplish the digestion and absorption of nutrition. By adding back in the helpful bacteria that normally line the intestines, the microvilli arise.

So your genome -- the sum total of your genetic inheritance -- is not sufficient to code for the entire structure of your digestive tract. You are alive because of your connection to the outside world; indeed, there is no boundary between you and the outside world's abundance of life.

This realization changes the picture of genes, too. They code for your cells, tissues, and organs; moreover, genes code for the interactions between your cells and the neighboring bacteria, with biomolecules being passed back and forth. The biochemistry of digestion is a shared project between your body and bacteria, a basic fact acknowledged for decades, but by implication, without bacteria there can be no you. This observation can be extended in every direction. Without trees breathing in carbon dioxide and exhaling oxygen, you couldn't breathe -- the forests are part of your lungs. Without viruses constantly mutating, you would have many fewer antibodies -- every virus is part of your immune system. The rivers that circulate fresh water are part of your bloodstream. These connections aren't incidental. Your body is the world, and by extension, so is your brain, since you share with the world every molecule, chemical reaction, and electrical impulse that constitutes the brain.

It makes people woozy to accept that there is no boundary between "me" and the whole world. What about the skin? It is portrayed in high school biology class as an impermeable barrier protecting you from invaders assaulting the body from "out there." But the metaphor of the skin as living armor isn't viable. Pause and move your hand, observing how the wrist and finger joints move under the skin. Why doesn't the skin break down with all this motion, the push and pull of your fingers closing and extending, your arm bending and stretching? Because the bacteria lining the creases in your skin digest the cell membranes of dying skin cells and produce lanolin, which lubricates the skin. How long would "you" and your genome last if your skin were cracking, open to infection just from typing on a laptop or waving goodbye to someone?

What is your body now? It's no longer just a human body. It's a community of single cell organisms that function harmoniously together (in times of good health) organizing themselves into tissues and organs. Such astonishingly complex cooperation implies a host of surprising things:

Your genes are siblings of bacterial genes.

The evolution of bacteria is actually human evolution at the same time.

One intelligence binds micro-organisms and "higher" life forms. There is no sharp dividing line between "smart" creatures and the "dumb" micro-organisms that evolved alongside them.

A skeptic may protest that we've used physical evidence to support a theory of mind. But science does the same thing all the time. By equating mind and brain, neuroscience has backed itself into a corner, forced to explain thoughts by looking at the interaction of molecules. In the final post of this series, we'll get out of that corner by putting mind first and brain second. That way, we solve the problem of how molecules of hydrogen, oxygen, and carbon -- the majority of "stuff" in the brain -- learned to think. The obvious answer is that they didn't. We think because we are expressions of the mind, not robots being operated by the brain.



In our last post we explored how your body and brain are not just your body and brain -- from a 21st-century scientific perspective, you are also a teeming community composed of single-cell organisms. A  tiny portion of the body are human cells (yours) while perhaps a hundred times more are mostly bacteria and archaea, known all together as the microbiome.  Let's go several steps further into this scientific re-examination of this thing you call your body.

Intellectually you know that your body today isn't the same as the body you had in the past. But if you tune in, you generally feel the present you in continuity with yesterday's you and all the others going back to childhood.  You can imagine even going back to a fetus in the womb and the fertilized ovum from which the fetus grew.  That first egg and sperm are derived without interruption from your parents' living bodies.  There is no gap where the life of your mother and father stopped and yours began.  The flow of life is seamless back to your mother's womb, and further back as far as human ancestry can go.

Even as we cross species boundaries in our backward journey, to Homo erectus and Homo habilis, our distant forebears, there are no gaps in life, not between you and hominids roaming the African savannah millions of years ago, not between you and the earliest single-cell organisms that were the first emerging life forms on our planet.  So you can think of yourself as one living being. You may feel separate in space, occupying a warm and cozy apartment that is unlike a primordial pond covered in blue-green algae. But think about how your skin sheds cells, not just dead epidermal cells but living bacteria that coat your skin in a fine layer. They have separated from you, and yet they are still you.  This apparent separation is only in space.  In time, there is no separation, there is continuity extending over eons, and time is where we live.

By expanding "you" beyond a package of skin and bones that was born on a certain day and will die one day in the future, you merge with the flow of life as a whole. In other words, you have adopted the perspective of life itself.  How old are you, then?  At the everyday level of scale you count how many candles there are on your last birthday cake. But take in the 400 trillion microorganisms that are the largest biological part of "you." Single cells can only reproduce by division. One amoeba divides in two. These aren't the amoeba's children. They are simply it, split in half. In a very real sense, all the amoebas alive today are the first amoeba, and the same goes for all the trillions of micro-organisms that occupy your body (and are necessary for it to survive, as we saw in previous posts. They aren't free riders).

As "you" expand, boundaries melt away.  Since the entire mass of animal and plant life on earth traces back to single-cell creatures, "you" are one enormous 3.5-billion-year-old being.   Separation in space makes each of us think we are individuals.  And we are.  But the continuum of time at the cellular scale reveals an equal reality: we are united as a single biological being. In fact, the continuity of life becomes stronger as we move to even smaller and smaller scales, where seamless properties essential to life are already present. Which means that the properties of "you" -- intelligence, self-organization, evolution, and a seamless flow of life -- exist at all scales.

Consider the molecular and atomic levels of scale.  There is no atom in your body that did not derive from something eaten, drunk, or breathed from the substance of the planet.  Whether we talk about the "you" that is sitting in a chair reading this sentence or the "you" that is a single enormous 3.5-billion-year-old being, neither lives on the planet -- in a sense they are the planet.  Your living body is the self-organization of the substance of the earth itself -- minerals, water, and air -- into zillions of life forms. Earth plays Scrabble, forming different words as the letters are recombined (in this case, genetic letters), and although some words, like "human," run away to live on their own, they forget who owns the game.

If "you" are a recreational pastime for the planet, what does it have in mind for its next move? Games involve a lot of repetition, but there has to be novelty as well, with records to break and highest scores to shatter. Earth decided that "you" needed a new playing field. At one level, the Mars probe named Curiosity can be viewed as a separate human achievement, and a very complex one. It involved skilled, clever engineers and scientists who figured out how to make a robot, propel it to another world, have it land, and then send information back to us.

But there's another way of looking at it. Just as reasonably, logically, and scientifically, our living planet earth has been working toward reaching out to touch its neighbor, Mars, for 3.5 billion years (at least). It has taken this long for earth to create living things out of its own substance that could eventually figure out how to take more of the same substance, fashion it into a rocket and a robot, and take "you" off planet. (In the case of the moon, "you" actually landed on it, yourself.)

While "you," focused on the separate self, were busy discovering fire, inventing agriculture, writing sacred texts, making war, having sex, and other survival stratagems, earth was busy organizing, through these activities, landing on the moon and tapping Mars on the shoulder. If this image strikes you as being too fanciful, look at the activity of your brain. You are conscious of having a purpose in mind when you walk, talk, work, and love. But it is undeniable that many brain activities are unconscious (e.g., controlling body temperature, growth, blood pressure), while the activity of the brain as a whole is totally unknown, either by you or any single region of your brain. Whatever makes earth a totality makes your brain a totality. Therefore, it isn't fanciful to think of earth as moving in a coherent, unified direction, just as your brain has from the moment you were born.

Or to put it in a word, if you (as a person) have a purpose, then you (as life on earth) have a purpose. The two are seamless, even if it suits our pride, and our unfathomable ego, to stand above and separate from our surroundings. Where does that leave mind? Mind is something that condenses in some spaces, expands in others, functioning at everyday levels of scale, planetary levels of scale, and microscopic levels of scale.  The smallest aspects of mind can be contained within larger aspects, just as molecules are contained within cells that are contained within bodies, and so on.

Science in the 21st century builds upon its long-held ambition to comprehend the very smallest and largest scales of nature, and it was always hoped -- even taken for granted -- that a set of fixed principles would suffice for the whole journey of discovery.  That hope broke down when Newton's set of laws didn't fit the quantum world.  Now the set of rules in the quantum world don't fit the latest problems, such as what came before the Big Bang, the origin of life, and the appearance of mind in the universe. In this post we've been arguing that "you" exist no matter how large or small the scale under consideration. You are beyond any horizons of scale, any boundaries that your mind believes exist. The Vedas speak of Brahman (reality) being bigger than the biggest and smaller than the smallest.  In modern terminology, this means "you." We'll finish in the next post with the mind-blowing conclusions that such reasoning leads to.



In our prior post we reconstructed the concept of "you", which we all typically, think of as bounded by the skin and the body it encloses.  But a hallmark of 21st-century science is to tear down boundaries.  A limitless universe that springs from the quantum vacuum, (along with possibly multiple universes) is the setting for an unbounded "you" - a self that merges with creation. The bond that unites you with the universe isn't simply physical, although every atom in your body comes from stardust, much of it the residue of exploding supernovas in intergalactic space.  Far more importantly, "you" are a mental construct, and therefore the bond that weaves your life into cosmic life is invisible.

We've argued that human intelligence most plausibly arose from an intelligent universe. As the great physicist Erwin Schrdinger declared, "To divide or multiply consciousness is something meaningless." In other words, consciousness is one. It only appears to be divided up into billions of human minds, and likely into uncountable forms of consciousness in other species. In the same way, you might see an aqua sweater as blue while I see it as green, but "color" itself is a single thing; two people can't have their own separate definition of it. There's a telling metaphor in the Vedic tradition: When the sun shines on a perfectly still sea, there is one sun reflecting back. But when the sea is rippled and moving, there are millions of tiny suns shining back. This appearance doesn't mean that the sun isn't one. This insight comes very close to an ancient passage from one of the central texts in Indian spirituality, the Yoga Vasistha: "Cosmic consciousness alone exists, now and ever. In it there are no worlds, no created beings. That consciousness reflected in itself appears to be creation."  In short, either consciousness is unbounded or you haven't looked deep enough.

The reason that Schrdinger felt competent to talk about unbounded consciousness was that physics had finally reached deep enough, to the most fundamental level of nature. In the quantum realm we know for certain that notions of "boundaries" evaporate: the wave functions that describe the locations and boundaries of "particles" extend in all directions to the borders of the universe itself.  Eventually the dissolution of boundaries became total. Einstein, who was a conservative in these matters compared to some of the other quantum pioneers, wrote a condolence letter to a friend who had just lost her husband. It contained the following famous passage: "Now he has departed from this strange world a little ahead of me. That means nothing. People like us, who believe in physics, know that the distinction between past, present, and future is only a stubbornly persistent illusion."

Quantum physics forced us to re-conceive ourselves as creatures who appear to be physical and bounded by time, even though our substance isn't material and has no boundaries in time. Down further in scale, re-conceiving who we are becomes an ever greater imperative: gluons, quarks, neutrinos, mesons, bosons (including the Higgs boson, the so-called "God particle") all intimately overlap. The universe - and you - continually bubbles up from these shadowy subatomic entities, each sensing, reflecting, and interacting in a seamless whole. In the nanoseconds when these elusive entities escape their invisible domain, science touches on the same picture painted by the Yoga Vasistha, of a creation born of unseen activity beyond the reach of inner thought and probably beyond the reach of imagination as well. What's left is mathematics clinging to the edge of the cliff with clutched fingers, hoping not to fall.  But mathematics isn't reality, while consciousness is.

All of us, including scientists, protect our boundaries, finding it hard to join unbounded reality. But if consciousness is real, we don't have to leap into an alien realm to reach the foundation of creation - it is inside ourselves. The limits of physicality have been reached. This is an area on which there is scientific consensus, thanks to quantum theory: There is a smallest level of scale beneath which one can go no further, at least in this "real" universe of four-dimensional spacetime, known as the Planck scale: 10-35 meters (-1 followed by 35 zeros).  Besides defining where physicality ends, the Planck scale also marks the end point of the environment that encloses material things, such as time, space, and the laws of nature. We don't know for sure what the smallest entities are like.  (The five senses don't help at such an inconceivable scale.) Some think they are the "multidimensional strings" of string theory, but there are other theories as well each sorely lacking in evidence but backed up by various intricate and beautiful mathematical formulations - indeed, the real problem is that there are too many mathematical possibilities that all seem equally valid - or invalid.

Whatever the smallest "stuff" is, it cannot be subdivided into smaller bits and pieces with known locations in time and space.  Instead, the universe emerges from the energetic void that is the foundational nature of creation. But even "void" is a tricky term, since the pre-creation state isn't empty, a pure, empty, vacuum. There are huge amounts of energy linked to vast numbers of virtual particles that potentially manifest an observable reality. Emptiness is spontaneously and continuously giving rise to these tiniest entities, coming and going in a "quantum foam."  Thus, from the smallest level of scale, the universe is not a place, an empty box in which we reside.  Creation is a process that brings existence out of non-existence. You are that process. You are seamlessly woven into a reality that is complete, whole, and perfect just as it is.  Surprisingly to some but not to all, the subjective experiences found in the Yoga Vasistha and many other ancient texts emphasize the unity of experience. These texts, as it turns out, precisely reflect our objective scientific understanding of how the universe arises.

The usual terms attached to ancient texts (e.g., spiritual, religious, wise, intuitive, enlightened) send up red flags to scientists and their ingrained distrust of subjectivity. So let's resort to a neutral term that links subject and object: observation. In a reality where artificial boundaries have collapsed, the "in here" of subjectivity is no longer walled off from the "out there" of objectivity.  The seamless flow of creation expresses itself in both. An observer-based science can be founded on meditation or the Hubble telescope. In a dualistic framework these are opposite poles.  But they come together in an unbounded framework.  For a century quantum physics has wrestled with the so-called observer effect as it impinges on isolated waves and particles. It was mind-blowing enough to believe that the process of observation turned waves into particles.  But the logical extension is mind-expanding: Everything in the universe depends on the linkage between observer, observed, and the act of observation.

If it is willing to adopt a touch of humility, science will see that ancient contemplative traditions arrived at conclusions that were not duplicated until "objective" methods acquired incredibly advanced, precise tools. The Higgs boson required billions of dollars in machinery, and countless hours of theorizing, in order to pry out a new piece of knowledge about how subatomic particles emerge from the void.  The ancient wisdom traditions began with the big picture instead, and their descriptions of the big picture still outstrip ours. The ancient explorers of consciousness understood the nature of the void, encountered not through mathematical calculation but through direct experience. The void revealed itself to be none other than mind, usually written as Mind to signify that it lies beyond our small, personal minds.

Getting contemporary physics to begin with the observer meets a great deal of resistance, but an observer-based science has one great advantage: There is no other way to get where we want to go.  Once physicality ends at the Planck scale, something must hold the universe together, and this something can't be in time or space, nor can it be made of physical "stuff."  We won't leap to the obvious conclusion: this something sounds an awful lot like God. The word "God" can conjure many different reactions based on different traditions and history. To use a value-neutral word, what this something actually sounds like is reality itself. The skeptics have their chance for rebuttal. If anyone can define reality in non-physical, non-linear terms, freed from all boundaries and yet capable of erecting the incredibly organized cosmos, it's difficult to imagine how mind isn't the answer. Otherwise, a timeless agency that can create time, a causeless entity that gave rise to causation, and a source that has no place but created space itself - such an origins story would be inconceivable to us without it being conscious.

And so we finally come to our conclusion.  Where time, space, matter, energy, gravity, and mathematics reach their limits, there is the source of creation, and the most plausible candidate is consciousness.  Reality is more than existence waiting to be filled with random events. It is existence guided and governed by the qualities of consciousness - intelligence, self-organization, self-awareness, orderliness, evolution, and infinite creativity.  What will it take for anything like consensus on this conclusion? The dominant metaphors of our modern culture are those of science and engineering.  These metaphors prejudice the contemplation of the question, what is the mind?  Materialist ways of thinking posit that the universe is an immense machine that created things like mind and the human brain by randomly tossing the building blocks of atoms and molecules until they happened to land in a pattern instead of scattered across the floor.

In this series of posts we've taken you from an automatic acceptance of these dominant, mechanistic metaphors, not to prove that they are wrong but to raise sufficient doubt about their certainty that you can entertain another possibility: Consciousness, or mind, is what the universe arises from and is made of.  Mind isn't just gurgling out of brain cells like water from a spring. It isn't merely a side effect of the brain's electrical and chemical activity, like heat from a bonfire. There isn't logical substantiation that brain = mind, even though  the majority  of scientists, philosophers, and the public may assume that this is so, since thoughts come out of the brain. Music comes out of a radio, but that doesn't mean that radio = music.

Radios don't contain little tiny rock bands or news commentators or symphony orchestras, yet they give rise to rock and roll, commentary, and symphonies. Radios transduce radio waves, which embedded in the infinite electromagnetic field, into specific, understandable auditory signals.  Similarly, the brain can be just as readily conceived of as the transducer of infinite Mind into our specific thoughts. And the brain could just as easily be thought of as transducing the quantum field into everything we perceive: matter, energy, time, space, and all perceived sensations. Could Mind have used evolution to arrive at the brain so that we can live as adaptable, interactive beings in a world that perfectly mirrors our conception of it?

In this view, our brains are mind the way every subatomic wave/particle is also mind. This unity solves the problem of deriving brain from mind or vice versa - they are two aspects of the activity of consciousness. The seemingly intractable issues that science faces today, particularly the challenge of consciousness, may actually have a simple answer, as we propose here. There's no surprise, then, that an fMRI scan can pick up very specific brain activity that corresponds with a person's emotions, mood, desires, and other aspects of mind. The match is seamless and perfect, as it has to be.  Radios don't get to eliminate the violins from a Mozart symphony; there has to be electrical activity for every aspect of the music. This is where the radio metaphor gets difficult: Can you imagine a functional radio that is itself constructed of radio waves?  In a very real sense, a radio, along with the entire universe, is derived from invisible wave functions. So ascribing mind to neurons merely begs the question. No "thing" can give rise to mind. Hard as it may be to accept, "things" were metaphors all along.

As easy as it is to think that the brain in its skull casing is all that is necessary to produce mind, it's just as easy, if you permit yourself, to think of Mind as the fundamental nature of everything that exists. By definition, reality lies beyond metaphors.  We've tried to convince you that the conventional set of metaphors must be discarded if you want to know reality, which means knowing yourself. Rather than discarding science, we are expanding it. We ask you to contemplate: What is the most scientific approach?  One that excludes some topics as "inappropriate for study"?  Or one that encourages even-handed investigation of all the evidence and phenomena at hand?   This is where "thinking outside the box" pays its greatest dividends, by expanding the capacity to be human and along the way to solve the unending mystery that is "you."


